--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
Make Data Work
strataconf.com
Presented by O’Reilly and Cloudera, 
Strata + Hadoop World is where 
cutting-edge data science and new 
business fundamentals intersect—
and merge.
n Learn business applications of 
data technologies
n Develop new skills through 
trainings and in-depth tutorials
n Connect with an international 
community of thousands who 
work with data
Job # 15420

--- PAGE 3 ---
O’Reilly Radar Team
Planning for Big Data

--- PAGE 4 ---
Planning for Big Data
by O’Reilly Radar Team
Copyright © 2012 O’Reilly Media. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: (800)
998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Edd Dumbill
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Interior Designer: David Futato
Illustrator: Robert Romano
March 2012:
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2012-03-12: First release
2012-09-04: Second release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781449329679 for release details.
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Planning for Big Data and related trade dress are
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod‐
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and
O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed
in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher
and authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting
from the use of the information contained herein.
ISBN: 978-1-449-32967-9
[LSI]

--- PAGE 5 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  vii
1. The Feedback Economy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
                                                                                                           1
Data-Obese, Digital-Fast                                                                     2
The Big Data Supply Chain                                                                2
Data collection                                                                                  3
Ingesting and cleaning                                                                     4
Hardware                                                                                           4
Platforms                                                                                           4
Machine learning                                                                             5
Human exploration                                                                          6
Storage                                                                                               6
Sharing and acting                                                                           6
Measuring and collecting feedback                                               7
Replacing Everything with Data                                                        7
A Feedback Economy                                                                          8
2. What Is Big Data?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
                                                                                                           9
What Does Big Data Look Like?                                                      10
Volume                                                                                             11
Velocity                                                                                            12
Variety                                                                                              13
In Practice                                                                                           14
Cloud or in-house?                                                                        14
Big data is big                                                                                  15
Big data is messy                                                                             15
iii

--- PAGE 6 ---
Culture                                                                                             15
Know where you want to go                                                         16
3. Apache Hadoop. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
                                                                                                           17
The Core of Hadoop: MapReduce                                                   18
Hadoop’s Lower Levels: HDFS and MapReduce                           18
Improving Programmability: Pig and Hive                                   19
Improving Data Access: HBase, Sqoop, and Flume                      19
Getting data in and out                                                                 20
Coordination and Workflow: Zookeeper and Oozie                    21
Management and Deployment: Ambari and Whirr                     21
Machine Learning: Mahout                                                              21
Using Hadoop                                                                                    22
4. Big Data Market Survey. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
                                                                                                           23
Just Hadoop?                                                                                      24
Integrated Hadoop Systems                                                             24
EMC Greenplum                                                                            25
IBM                                                                                                  26
Microsoft                                                                                         27
Oracle                                                                                               28
Availability                                                                                      29
Analytical Databases with Hadoop Connectivity                         29
Quick facts                                                                                       30
Hadoop-Centered Companies                                                         30
Cloudera                                                                                          31
Hortonworks                                                                                   31
An overview of Hadoop distributions (part 1)                          31
An overview of Hadoop distributions (part 2)                          33
Notes                                                                                                    34
5. Microsoft’s Plan for Big Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
                                                                                                           37
Microsoft’s Hadoop Distribution                                                    37
Developers, Developers, Developers                                               39
Streaming Data and NoSQL                                                             39
Toward an Integrated Environment                                                40
The Data Marketplace                                                                       40
Summary                                                                                             40
iv 
| 
Table of Contents

--- PAGE 7 ---
6. Big Data in the Cloud. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
                                                                                                           43
IaaS and Private Clouds                                                                    43
Platform solutions                                                                             44
Amazon Web Services                                                                   45
Google                                                                                              46
Microsoft                                                                                         47
Big data cloud platforms compared                                                48
Conclusion                                                                                          49
Notes                                                                                                    49
7. Data Marketplaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
                                                                                                           51
What Do Marketplaces Do?                                                             51
Infochimps                                                                                          52
Factual                                                                                                 53
Windows Azure Data Marketplace                                                 54
DataMarket                                                                                         54
Data Markets Compared                                                                  55
Other Data Suppliers                                                                         55
8. The NoSQL Movement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
                                                                                                           57
Size, Response, Availability                                                              59
Changing Data and Cheap Lunches                                                61
The Sacred Cows                                                                                65
Other features                                                                                     67
In the End                                                                                           69
9. Why Visualization Matters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  71
A Picture Is Worth 1000 Rows                                                         71
Types of Visualization                                                                       72
Explaining and exploring                                                              72
Your Customers Make Decisions, Too                                            73
Do Yourself a Favor and Hire a Designer                                       73
10. The Future of Big Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  75
                                                                                                           75
More Powerful and Expressive Tools for Analysis                        75
Streaming Data Processing                                                               76
Rise of Data Marketplaces                                                                77
Table of Contents 
| 
v

--- PAGE 8 ---
Development of Data Science Workflows and Tools                    77
Increased Understanding of and Demand for Visualization      78
vi 
| 
Table of Contents

--- PAGE 9 ---
Introduction
In February 2011, over 1,300 people came together for the inaugural
O’Reilly Strata Conference in Santa Clara, California. Though repre‐
senting diverse fields, from insurance to media and high-tech to
healthcare, attendees buzzed with a new-found common identity: they
were data scientists. Entrepreneurial and resourceful, combining pro‐
gramming skills with math, data scientists have emerged as a new
profession leading the march towards data-driven business.
This new profession rides on the wave of big data. Our businesses are
creating ever more data, and as consumers we are sources of massive
streams of information, thanks to social networks and smartphones.
In this raw material lies much of value: insight about businesses and
markets, and the scope to create new kinds of hyper-personalized
products and services.
Five years ago, only big business could afford to profit from big data:
Walmart and Google, specialized financial traders. Today, thanks to
an open source project called Hadoop, commodity Linux hardware
and cloud computing, this power is in reach for everyone. A data rev‐
olution is sweeping business, government and science, with conse‐
quences as far reaching and long lasting as the web itself.
Every revolution has to start somewhere, and the question for many
is “how can data science and big data help my organization?” After
years of data processing choices being straightforward, there’s now a
diverse landscape to negotiate. What’s more, to become data-driven,
you must grapple with changes that are cultural as well as technolog‐
ical.
vii

--- PAGE 10 ---
The aim of this book is to help you understand what big data is, why
it matters, and where to get started. If you’re already working with big
data, hand this book to your colleagues or executives to help them
better appreciate the issues and possibilities.
I am grateful to my fellow O’Reilly Radar authors for contributing
articles in addition to myself: Alistair Croll, Julie Steele and Mike Lou‐
kides.
Edd Dumbill
Program Chair, O’Reilly Strata Conference
February 2012
viii 
| 
Introduction

--- PAGE 11 ---
CHAPTER 1
The Feedback Economy
By Alistair Croll
Military strategist John Boyd spent a lot of time understanding how
to win battles. Building on his experience as a fighter pilot, he broke
down the process of observing and reacting into something called an
Observe, Orient, Decide, and Act (OODA) loop. Combat, he realized,
consisted of observing your circumstances, orienting yourself to your
enemy’s way of thinking and your environment, deciding on a course
of action, and then acting on it.
The Observe, Orient, Decide, and Act (OODA) loop. Larger version
available here.
The most important part of this loop isn’t included in the OODA ac‐
ronym, however. It’s the fact that it’s a loop. The results of earlier
actions feed back into later, hopefully wiser, ones. Over time, the fight‐
er “gets inside” their opponent’s loop, outsmarting and outmaneuver‐
ing them. The system learns.
1

--- PAGE 12 ---
Boyd’s genius was to realize that winning requires two things: being
able to collect and analyze information better, and being able to act on
that information faster, incorporating what’s learned into the next
iteration. Today, what Boyd learned in a cockpit applies to nearly ev‐
erything we do.
Data-Obese, Digital-Fast
In our always-on lives we’re flooded with cheap, abundant informa‐
tion. We need to capture and analyze it well, separating digital wheat
from digital chaff, identifying meaningful undercurrents while ignor‐
ing meaningless social flotsam. Clay Johnson argues that we need to
go on an information diet, and makes a good case for conscious con‐
sumption. In an era of information obesity, we need to eat better.
There’s a reason they call it a feed, after all.
It’s not just an overabundance of data that makes Boyd’s insights vital.
In the last 20 years, much of human interaction has shifted from atoms
to bits. When interactions become digital, they become instantaneous,
interactive, and easily copied. It’s as easy to tell the world as to tell a
friend, and a day’s shopping is reduced to a few clicks.
The move from atoms to bits reduces the coefficient of friction of entire
industries to zero. Teenagers shun e-mail as too slow, opting for instant
messages. The digitization of our world means that trips around the
OODA loop happen faster than ever, and continue to accelerate.
We’re drowning in data. Bits are faster than atoms. Our jungle-surplus
wetware can’t keep up. At least, not without Boyd’s help. In a society
where every person, tethered to their smartphone, is both a sensor and
an end node, we need better ways to observe and orient, whether we’re
at home or at work, solving the world’s problems or planning a play
date. And we need to be constantly deciding, acting, and experiment‐
ing, feeding what we learn back into future behavior.
We’re entering a feedback economy.
The Big Data Supply Chain
Consider how a company collects, analyzes, and acts on data.
2 
| 
Chapter 1: The Feedback Economy

--- PAGE 13 ---
The big data supply chain. Larger version available here.
Let’s look at these components in order.
Data collection
The first step in a data supply chain is to get the data in the first place.
Information comes in from a variety of sources, both public and pri‐
vate. We’re a promiscuous society online, and with the advent of low-
cost data marketplaces, it’s possible to get nearly any nugget of data
relatively affordably. From social network sentiment, to weather re‐
ports, to economic indicators, public information is grist for the big
data mill. Alongside this, we have organization-specific data such as
retail traffic, call center volumes, product recalls, or customer loyalty
indicators.
The legality of collection is perhaps more restrictive than getting the
data in the first place. Some data is heavily regulated—HIPAA governs
healthcare, while PCI restricts financial transactions. In other cases,
the act of combining data may be illegal because it generates personally
identifiable information (PII). For example, courts have ruled differ‐
ently on whether IP addresses aren’t PII, and the California Supreme
Court ruled that zip codes are. Navigating these regulations imposes
some serious constraints on what can be collected and how it can be
combined.
The era of ubiquitous computing means that everyone is a potential
source of data, too. A modern smartphone can sense light, sound,
motion, location, nearby networks and devices, and more, making it
The Big Data Supply Chain 
| 
3

--- PAGE 14 ---
a perfect data collector. As consumers opt into loyalty programs and
install applications, they become sensors that can feed the data supply
chain.
In big data, the collection is often challenging because of the sheer
volume of information, or the speed with which it arrives, both of
which demand new approaches and architectures.
Ingesting and cleaning
Once the data is collected, it must be ingested. In traditional business
intelligence (BI) parlance, this is known as Extract, Transform, and
Load (ETL): the act of putting the right information into the correct
tables of a database schema and manipulating certain fields to make
them easier to work with.
One of the distinguishing characteristics of big data, however, is that
the data is often unstructured. That means we don’t know the inherent
schema of the information before we start to analyze it. We may still
transform the information—replacing an IP address with the name of
a city, for example, or anonymizing certain fields with a one-way hash
function—but we may hold onto the original data and only define its
structure as we analyze it.
Hardware
The information we’ve ingested needs to be analyzed by people and
machines. That means hardware, in the form of computing, storage,
and networks. Big data doesn’t change this, but it does change how it’s
used. Virtualization, for example, allows operators to spin up many
machines temporarily, then destroy them once the processing is over.
Cloud computing is also a boon to big data. Paying by consumption
destroys the barriers to entry that would prohibit many organizations
from playing with large datasets, because there’s no up-front invest‐
ment. In many ways, big data gives clouds something to do.
Platforms
Where big data is new is in the platforms and frameworks we create
to crunch large amounts of information quickly. One way to speed up
data analysis is to break the data into chunks that can be analyzed in
parallel. Another is to build a pipeline of processing steps, each opti‐
mized for a particular task.
4 
| 
Chapter 1: The Feedback Economy

--- PAGE 15 ---
Big data is often about fast results, rather than simply crunching a large
amount of information. That’s important for two reasons:
1. Much of the big data work going on today is related to user in‐
terfaces and the web. Suggesting what books someone will enjoy,
or delivering search results, or finding the best flight, requires an
answer in the time it takes a page to load. The only way to ac‐
complish this is to spread out the task, which is one of the reasons
why Google has nearly a million servers.
2. We analyze unstructured data iteratively. As we first explore a da‐
taset, we don’t know which dimensions matter. What if we seg‐
ment by age? Filter by country? Sort by purchase price? Split the
results by gender? This kind of “what if” analysis is exploratory
in nature, and analysts are only as productive as their ability to
explore freely. Big data may be big. But if it’s not fast, it’s unintel‐
ligible.
Much of the hype around big data companies today is a result of the
retooling of enterprise BI. For decades, companies have relied on
structured relational databases and data warehouses—many of them
can’t handle the exploration, lack of structure, speed, and massive sizes
of big data applications.
Machine learning
One way to think about big data is that it’s “more data than you can go
through by hand.” For much of the data we want to analyze today, we
need a machine’s help.
Part of that help happens at ingestion. For example, natural language
processing tries to read unstructured text and deduce what it means:
Was this Twitter user happy or sad? Is this call center recording good,
or was the customer angry?
Machine learning is important elsewhere in the data supply chain.
When we analyze information, we’re trying to find signal within the
noise, to discern patterns. Humans can’t find signal well by themselves.
Just as astronomers use algorithms to scan the night’s sky for signals,
then verify any promising anomalies themselves, so too can data an‐
alysts use machines to find interesting dimensions, groupings, or pat‐
terns within the data. Machines can work at a lower signal-to-noise
ratio than people.
The Big Data Supply Chain 
| 
5

--- PAGE 16 ---
Human exploration
While machine learning is an important tool to the data analyst, there’s
no substitute for human eyes and ears. Displaying the data in human-
readable form is hard work, stretching the limits of multi-dimensional
visualization. While most analysts work with spreadsheets or simple
query languages today, that’s changing.
Creve Maples, an early advocate of better computer interaction, de‐
signs systems that take dozens of independent, data sources and dis‐
plays them in navigable 3D environments, complete with sound and
other cues. Maples’ studies show that when we feed an analyst data in
this way, they can often find answers in minutes instead of months.
This kind of interactivity requires the speed and parallelism explained
above, as well as new interfaces and multi-sensory environments that
allow an analyst to work alongside the machine, immersed in the data.
Storage
Big data takes a lot of storage. In addition to the actual information in
its raw form, there’s the transformed information; the virtual machines
used to crunch it; the schemas and tables resulting from analysis; and
the many formats that legacy tools require so they can work alongside
new technology. Often, storage is a combination of cloud and on-
premise storage, using traditional flat-file and relational databases
alongside more recent, post-SQL storage systems.
During and after analysis, the big data supply chain needs a warehouse.
Comparing year-on-year progress or changes over time means we
have to keep copies of everything, along with the algorithms and
queries with which we analyzed it.
Sharing and acting
All of this analysis isn’t much good if we can’t act on it. As with col‐
lection, this isn’t simply a technical matter—it involves legislation, or‐
ganizational politics, and a willingness to experiment. The data might
be shared openly with the world, or closely guarded.
The best companies tie big data results into everything from hiring
and firing decisions, to strategic planning, to market positioning.
While it’s easy to buy into big data technology, it’s far harder to shift
6 
| 
Chapter 1: The Feedback Economy

--- PAGE 17 ---
an organization’s culture. In many ways, big data adoption isn’t a hard‐
ware retirement issue, it’s an employee retirement one.
We’ve seen similar resistance to change each time there’s a big change
in information technology. Mainframes, client-server computing,
packet-based networks, and the web all had their detractors. A NASA
study into the failure of Ada, the first object-oriented language, con‐
cluded that proponents had over-promised, and there was a lack of a
supporting ecosystem to help the new language flourish. Big data, and
its close cousin, cloud computing, are likely to encounter similar ob‐
stacles.
A big data mindset is one of experimentation, of taking measured risks
and assessing their impact quickly. It’s similar to the Lean Startup
movement, which advocates fast, iterative learning and tight links to
customers. But while a small startup can be lean because it’s nascent
and close to its market, a big organization needs big data and an OODA
loop to react well and iterate fast.
The big data supply chain is the organizational OODA loop. It’s the
big business answer to the lean startup.
Measuring and collecting feedback
Just as John Boyd’s OODA loop is mostly about the loop, so big data
is mostly about feedback. Simply analyzing information isn’t particu‐
larly useful. To work, the organization has to choose a course of action
from the results, then observe what happens and use that information
to collect new data or analyze things in a different way. It’s a process
of continuous optimization that affects every facet of a business.
Replacing Everything with Data
Software is eating the world. Verticals like publishing, music, real es‐
tate and banking once had strong barriers to entry. Now they’ve been
entirely disrupted by the elimination of middlemen. The last film pro‐
jector rolled off the line in 2011: movies are now digital from camera
to projector. The Post Office stumbles because nobody writes letters,
even as Federal Express becomes the planet’s supply chain.
Companies that get themselves on a feedback footing will dominate
their industries, building better things faster for less money. Those that
don’t are already the walking dead, and will soon be little more than
Replacing Everything with Data 
| 
7

--- PAGE 18 ---
case studies and colorful anecdotes. Big data, new interfaces, and
ubiquitous computing are tectonic shifts in the way we live and work.
A Feedback Economy
Big data, continuous optimization, and replacing everything with data
pave the way for something far larger, and far more important, than
simple business efficiency. They usher in a new era for humanity, with
all its warts and glory. They herald the arrival of the feedback economy.
The efficiencies and optimizations that come from constant, iterative
feedback will soon become the norm for businesses and governments.
We’re moving beyond an information economy. Information on its
own isn’t an advantage, anyway. Instead, this is the era of the feedback
economy, and Boyd is, in many ways, the first feedback economist.
Alistair Croll is the founder of Bitcurrent, a research firm focused on
emerging technologies. He’s founded a variety of startups, and technol‐
ogy accelerators, including Year One Labs, CloudOps, Rednod, Cora‐
diant (acquired by BMC in 2011) and Networkshop. He’s a frequent
speaker and writer on subjects such as entrepreneurship, cloud com‐
puting, Big Data, Internet performance and web technology, and has
helped launch a number of major conferences on these topics.
8 
| 
Chapter 1: The Feedback Economy

--- PAGE 19 ---
CHAPTER 2
What Is Big Data?
By Edd Dumbill
Big data is data that exceeds the processing capacity of conventional
database systems. The data is too big, moves too fast, or doesn’t fit the
strictures of your database architectures. To gain value from this data,
you must choose an alternative way to process it.
The hot IT buzzword of 2012, big data has become viable as cost-
effective approaches have emerged to tame the volume, velocity and
variability of massive data. Within this data lie valuable patterns and
information, previously hidden because of the amount of work re‐
quired to extract them. To leading corporations, such as Walmart or
Google, this power has been in reach for some time, but at fantastic
cost. Today’s commodity hardware, cloud architectures and open
source software bring big data processing into the reach of the less
well-resourced. Big data processing is eminently feasible for even the
small garage startups, who can cheaply rent server time in the cloud.
The value of big data to an organization falls into two categories: an‐
alytical use, and enabling new products. Big data analytics can reveal
insights hidden previously by data too costly to process, such as peer
influence among customers, revealed by analyzing shoppers’ transac‐
tions, social and geographical data. Being able to process every item
of data in reasonable time removes the troublesome need for sampling
and promotes an investigative approach to data, in contrast to the
somewhat static nature of running predetermined reports.
The past decade’s successful web startups are prime examples of big
data used as an enabler of new products and services. For example, by
combining a large number of signals from a user’s actions and those
9

--- PAGE 20 ---
of their friends, Facebook has been able to craft a highly personalized
user experience and create a new kind of advertising business. It’s no
coincidence that the lion’s share of ideas and tools underpinning big
data have emerged from Google, Yahoo, Amazon and Facebook.
The emergence of big data into the enterprise brings with it a necessary
counterpart: agility. Successfully exploiting the value in big data re‐
quires experimentation and exploration. Whether creating new prod‐
ucts or looking for ways to gain competitive advantage, the job calls
for curiosity and an entrepreneurial outlook.
What Does Big Data Look Like?
As a catch-all term, “big data” can be pretty nebulous, in the same way
that the term “cloud” covers diverse technologies. Input data to big
data systems could be chatter from social networks, web server logs,
traffic flow sensors, satellite imagery, broadcast audio streams, bank‐
ing transactions, MP3s of rock music, the content of web pages, scans
of government documents, GPS trails, telemetry from automobiles,
financial market data, the list goes on. Are these all really the same
thing?
To clarify matters, the three Vs of volume, velocity and variety are
commonly used to characterize different aspects of big data. They’re
a helpful lens through which to view and understand the nature of the
10 
| 
Chapter 2: What Is Big Data?

--- PAGE 21 ---
data and the software platforms available to exploit them. Most prob‐
ably you will contend with each of the Vs to one degree or another.
Volume
The benefit gained from the ability to process large amounts of infor‐
mation is the main attraction of big data analytics. Having more data
beats out having better models: simple bits of math can be unreason‐
ably effective given large amounts of data. If you could run that forecast
taking into account 300 factors rather than 6, could you predict de‐
mand better?
This volume presents the most immediate challenge to conventional
IT structures. It calls for scalable storage, and a distributed approach
to querying. Many companies already have large amounts of archived
data, perhaps in the form of logs, but not the capacity to process it.
Assuming that the volumes of data are larger than those conventional
relational database infrastructures can cope with, processing options
break down broadly into a choice between massively parallel process‐
ing architectures—data warehouses or databases such as Greenplum
—and Apache Hadoop-based solutions. This choice is often informed
by the degree to which the one of the other “Vs”—variety—comes into
play. Typically, data warehousing approaches involve predetermined
schemas, suiting a regular and slowly evolving dataset. Apache Ha‐
doop, on the other hand, places no conditions on the structure of the
data it can process.
At its core, Hadoop is a platform for distributing computing problems
across a number of servers. First developed and released as open
source by Yahoo, it implements the MapReduce approach pioneered
by Google in compiling its search indexes. Hadoop’s MapReduce in‐
volves distributing a dataset among multiple servers and operating on
the data: the “map” stage. The partial results are then recombined: the
“reduce” stage.
To store data, Hadoop utilizes its own distributed filesystem, HDFS,
which makes data available to multiple computing nodes. A typical
Hadoop usage pattern involves three stages:
• loading data into HDFS,
• MapReduce operations, and
What Does Big Data Look Like? 
| 
11

--- PAGE 22 ---
• retrieving results from HDFS.
This process is by nature a batch operation, suited for analytical or
non-interactive computing tasks. Because of this, Hadoop is not itself
a database or data warehouse solution, but can act as an analytical
adjunct to one.
One of the most well-known Hadoop users is Facebook, whose model
follows this pattern. A MySQL database stores the core data. This is
then reflected into Hadoop, where computations occur, such as cre‐
ating recommendations for you based on your friends’ interests. Face‐
book then transfers the results back into MySQL, for use in pages
served to users.
Velocity
The importance of data’s velocity—the increasing rate at which data
flows into an organization—has followed a similar pattern to that of
volume. Problems previously restricted to segments of industry are
now presenting themselves in a much broader setting. Specialized
companies such as financial traders have long turned systems that cope
with fast moving data to their advantage. Now it’s our turn.
Why is that so? The Internet and mobile era means that the way we
deliver and consume products and services is increasingly instrumen‐
ted, generating a data flow back to the provider. Online retailers are
able to compile large histories of customers’ every click and interac‐
tion: not just the final sales. Those who are able to quickly utilize that
information, by recommending additional purchases, for instance,
gain competitive advantage. The smartphone era increases again the
rate of data inflow, as consumers carry with them a streaming source
of geolocated imagery and audio data.
It’s not just the velocity of the incoming data that’s the issue: it’s possible
to stream fast-moving data into bulk storage for later batch processing,
for example. The importance lies in the speed of the feedback loop,
taking data from input through to decision. A commercial from
IBM makes the point that you wouldn’t cross the road if all you had
was a five minute old snapshot of traffic location. There are times when
you simply won’t be able to wait for a report to run or a Hadoop job
to complete.
Industry terminology for such fast-moving data tends to be either
“streaming data,” or “complex event processing.” This latter term was
12 
| 
Chapter 2: What Is Big Data?

--- PAGE 23 ---
more established in product categories before streaming processing
data gained more widespread relevance, and seems likely to diminish
in favor of streaming.
There are two main reasons to consider streaming processing. The
first is when the input data are too fast to store in their entirety: in
order to keep storage requirements practical some level of analysis
must occur as the data streams in. At the extreme end of the scale, the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN generates so much data that scientists
must discard the overwhelming majority of it—hoping hard they’ve
not thrown away anything useful. The second reason to consider
streaming is where the application mandates immediate response to
the data. Thanks to the rise of mobile applications and online gaming
this is an increasingly common situation.
Product categories for handling streaming data divide into established
proprietary products such as IBM’s InfoSphere Streams, and the less-
polished and still emergent open source frameworks originating in the
web industry: Twitter’s Storm, and Yahoo S4.
As mentioned above, it’s not just about input data. The velocity of a
system’s outputs can matter too. The tighter the feedback loop, the
greater the competitive advantage. The results might go directly into
a product, such as Facebook’s recommendations, or into dashboards
used to drive decision-making.
It’s this need for speed, particularly on the web, that has driven the
development of key-value stores and columnar databases, optimized
for the fast retrieval of precomputed information. These databases
form part of an umbrella category known as NoSQL, used when rela‐
tional models aren’t the right fit.
Variety
Rarely does data present itself in a form perfectly ordered and ready
for processing. A common theme in big data systems is that the source
data is diverse, and doesn’t fall into neat relational structures. It could
be text from social networks, image data, a raw feed directly from a
sensor source. None of these things come ready for integration into
an application.
Even on the web, where computer-to-computer communication
ought to bring some guarantees, the reality of data is messy. Different
browsers send different data, users withhold information, they may be
What Does Big Data Look Like? 
| 
13

--- PAGE 24 ---
using differing software versions or vendors to communicate with you.
And you can bet that if part of the process involves a human, there will
be error and inconsistency.
A common use of big data processing is to take unstructured data and
extract ordered meaning, for consumption either by humans or as a
structured input to an application. One such example is entity reso‐
lution, the process of determining exactly what a name refers to. Is this
city London, England, or London, Texas? By the time your business
logic gets to it, you don’t want to be guessing.
The process of moving from source data to processed application data
involves the loss of information. When you tidy up, you end up throw‐
ing stuff away. This underlines a principle of big data: when you can,
keep everything. There may well be useful signals in the bits you throw
away. If you lose the source data, there’s no going back.
Despite the popularity and well understood nature of relational data‐
bases, it is not the case that they should always be the destination for
data, even when tidied up. Certain data types suit certain classes of
database better. For instance, documents encoded as XML are most
versatile when stored in a dedicated XML store such as MarkLogic.
Social network relations are graphs by nature, and graph databases
such as Neo4J make operations on them simpler and more efficient.
Even where there’s not a radical data type mismatch, a disadvantage
of the relational database is the static nature of its schemas. In an agile,
exploratory environment, the results of computations will evolve with
the detection and extraction of more signals. Semi-structured NoSQL
databases meet this need for flexibility: they provide enough structure
to organize data, but do not require the exact schema of the data before
storing it.
In Practice
We have explored the nature of big data, and surveyed the landscape
of big data from a high level. As usual, when it comes to deployment
there are dimensions to consider over and above tool selection.
Cloud or in-house?
The majority of big data solutions are now provided in three forms:
software-only, as an appliance or cloud-based. Decisions between
which route to take will depend, among other things, on issues of data
14 
| 
Chapter 2: What Is Big Data?

--- PAGE 25 ---
locality, privacy and regulation, human resources and project require‐
ments. Many organizations opt for a hybrid solution: using on-
demand cloud resources to supplement in-house deployments.
Big data is big
It is a fundamental fact that data that is too big to process conven‐
tionally is also too big to transport anywhere. IT is undergoing an
inversion of priorities: it’s the program that needs to move, not the
data. If you want to analyze data from the U.S. Census, it’s a lot easier
to run your code on Amazon’s web services platform, which hosts such
data locally, and won’t cost you time or money to transfer it.
Even if the data isn’t too big to move, locality can still be an issue,
especially with rapidly updating data. Financial trading systems crowd
into data centers to get the fastest connection to source data, because
that millisecond difference in processing time equates to competitive
advantage.
Big data is messy
It’s not all about infrastructure. Big data practitioners consistently re‐
port that 80% of the effort involved in dealing with data is cleaning it
up in the first place, as Pete Warden observes in his Big Data Glossa‐
ry: “I probably spend more time turning messy source data into some‐
thing usable than I do on the rest of the data analysis process com‐
bined.”
Because of the high cost of data acquisition and cleaning, it’s worth
considering what you actually need to source yourself. Data market‐
places are a means of obtaining common data, and you are often able
to contribute improvements back. Quality can of course be variable,
but will increasingly be a benchmark on which data marketplaces
compete.
Culture
The phenomenon of big data is closely tied to the emergence of data
science, a discipline that combines math, programming and scientific
instinct. Benefiting from big data means investing in teams with this
skillset, and surrounding them with an organizational willingness to
understand and use data for advantage.
In Practice 
| 
15

--- PAGE 26 ---
In his report, “Building Data Science Teams,” D.J. Patil characterizes
data scientists as having the following qualities:
• Technical expertise: the best data scientists typically have deep
expertise in some scientific discipline.
• Curiosity: a desire to go beneath the surface and discover and
distill a problem down into a very clear set of hypotheses that can
be tested.
• Storytelling: the ability to use data to tell a story and to be able to
communicate it effectively.
• Cleverness: the ability to look at a problem in different, creative
ways.
The far-reaching nature of big data analytics projects can have un‐
comfortable aspects: data must be broken out of silos in order to be
mined, and the organization must learn how to communicate and in‐
terpet the results of analysis.
Those skills of storytelling and cleverness are the gateway factors that
ultimately dictate whether the benefits of analytical labors are absor‐
bed by an organization. The art and practice of visualizing data is be‐
coming ever more important in bridging the human-computer gap to
mediate analytical insight in a meaningful way.
Know where you want to go
Finally, remember that big data is no panacea. You can find patterns
and clues in your data, but then what? Christer Johnson, IBM’s leader
for advanced analytics in North America, gives this advice to busi‐
nesses starting out with big data: first, decide what problem you want
to solve.
If you pick a real business problem, such as how you can change your
advertising strategy to increase spend per customer, it will guide your
implementation. While big data work benefits from an enterprising
spirit, it also benefits strongly from a concrete goal.
Edd Dumbill is a technologist, writer and programmer based in Cali‐
fornia. He is the program chair for the O’Reilly Strata and Open Source
Convention Conferences.
16 
| 
Chapter 2: What Is Big Data?

--- PAGE 27 ---
CHAPTER 3
Apache Hadoop
By Edd Dumbill
Apache Hadoop has been the driving force behind the growth of the
big data industry. You’ll hear it mentioned often, along with associated
technologies such as Hive and Pig. But what does it do, and why do
you need all its strangely named friends such as Oozie, Zookeeper and
Flume?
Hadoop brings the ability to cheaply process large amounts of data,
regardless of its structure. By large, we mean from 10-100 gigabytes
and above. How is this different from what went before?
Existing enterprise data warehouses and relational databases excel at
processing structured data, and can store massive amounts of data,
though at cost. However, this requirement for structure restricts the
kinds of data that can be processed, and it imposes an inertia that
makes data warehouses unsuited for agile exploration of massive het‐
erogenous data. The amount of effort required to warehouse data often
means that valuable data sources in organizations are never mined.
This is where Hadoop can make a big difference.
This article examines the components of the Hadoop ecosystem and
explains the functions of each.
17

--- PAGE 28 ---
The Core of Hadoop: MapReduce
Created at Google in response to the problem of creating web search
indexes, the MapReduce framework is the powerhouse behind most
of today’s big data processing. In addition to Hadoop, you’ll find Map‐
Reduce inside MPP and NoSQL databases such as Vertica or Mon‐
goDB.
The important innovation of MapReduce is the ability to take a query
over a dataset, divide it, and run it in parallel over multiple nodes.
Distributing the computation solves the issue of data too large to fit
onto a single machine. Combine this technique with commodity Linux
servers and you have a cost-effective alternative to massive computing
arrays.
At its core, Hadoop is an open source MapReduce implementation.
Funded by Yahoo, it emerged in 2006 and, according to its creator
Doug Cutting, reached “web scale” capability in early 2008.
As the Hadoop project matured, it acquired further components to
enhance its usability and functionality. The name “Hadoop” has come
to represent this entire ecosystem. There are parallels with the emer‐
gence of Linux: the name refers strictly to the Linux kernel, but it has
gained acceptance as referring to a complete operating system.
Hadoop’s Lower Levels: HDFS and MapReduce
We discussed above the ability of MapReduce to distribute computa‐
tion over multiple servers. For that computation to take place, each
server must have access to the data. This is the role of HDFS, the Ha‐
doop Distributed File System.
HDFS and MapReduce are robust. Servers in a Hadoop cluster can
fail, and not abort the computation process. HDFS ensures data is
replicated with redundancy across the cluster. On completion of a
calculation, a node will write its results back into HDFS.
There are no restrictions on the data that HDFS stores. Data may be
unstructured and schemaless. By contrast, relational databases require
that data be structured and schemas defined before storing the data.
With HDFS, making sense of the data is the responsibility of the de‐
veloper’s code.
18 
| 
Chapter 3: Apache Hadoop

--- PAGE 29 ---
Programming Hadoop at the MapReduce level is a case of working
with the Java APIs, and manually loading data files into HDFS.
Improving Programmability: Pig and Hive
Working directly with Java APIs can be tedious and error prone. It also
restricts usage of Hadoop to Java programmers. Hadoop offers two
solutions for making Hadoop programming easier.
• Pig is a programming language that simplifies the common tasks
of working with Hadoop: loading data, expressing transforma‐
tions on the data, and storing the final results. Pig’s built-in op‐
erations can make sense of semi-structured data, such as log files,
and the language is extensible using Java to add support for cus‐
tom data types and transformations.
• Hive enables Hadoop to operate as a data warehouse. It superim‐
poses structure on data in HDFS, and then permits queries over
the data using a familiar SQL-like syntax. As with Pig, Hive’s core
capabilities are extensible.
Choosing between Hive and Pig can be confusing. Hive is more suit‐
able for data warehousing tasks, with predominantly static structure
and the need for frequent analysis. Hive’s closeness to SQL makes it
an ideal point of integration between Hadoop and other business in‐
telligence tools.
Pig gives the developer more agility for the exploration of large data‐
sets, allowing the development of succinct scripts for transforming
data flows for incorporation into larger applications. Pig is a thinner
layer over Hadoop than Hive, and its main advantage is to drastically
cut the amount of code needed compared to direct use of Hadoop’s
Java APIs. As such, Pig’s intended audience remains primarily the
software developer.
Improving Data Access: HBase, Sqoop, and
Flume
At its heart, Hadoop is a batch-oriented system. Data are loaded into
HDFS, processed, and then retrieved. This is somewhat of a computing
throwback, and often interactive and random access to data is re‐
quired.
Improving Programmability: Pig and Hive 
| 
19

--- PAGE 30 ---
Enter HBase, a column-oriented database that runs on top of HDFS.
Modeled after Google’s BigTable, the project’s goal is to host billions
of rows of data for rapid access. MapReduce can use HBase as both a
source and a destination for its computations, and Hive and Pig can
be used in combination with HBase.
In order to grant random access to the data, HBase does impose a few
restrictions: performance with Hive is 4-5 times slower than plain
HDFS, and the maximum amount of data you can store is approxi‐
mately a petabyte, versus HDFS’ limit of over 30PB.
HBase is ill-suited to ad-hoc analytics, and more appropriate for in‐
tegrating big data as part of a larger application. Use cases include
logging, counting and storing time-series data.
The Hadoop Bestiary
Ambari
Deployment, configuration and monitoring
Flume
Collection and import of log and event data
HBase
Column-oriented database scaling to billions of rows
HCatalog
Schema and data type sharing over Pig, Hive and MapReduce
HDFS
Distributed redundant filesystem for Hadoop
Hive
Data warehouse with SQL-like access
Mahout
Library of machine learning and data mining algorithms
MapReduce
Parallel computation on server clusters
Pig
High-level programming language for Hadoop computations
Oozie
Orchestration and workflow management
Sqoop
Imports data from relational databases
Whirr
Cloud-agnostic deployment of clusters
Zookeeper
Configuration management and coordination
Getting data in and out
Improved interoperability with the rest of the data world is provided
by Sqoop and Flume. Sqoop is a tool designed to import data from
relational databases into Hadoop: either directly into HDFS, or into
Hive. Flume is designed to import streaming flows of log data directly
into HDFS.
20 
| 
Chapter 3: Apache Hadoop

--- PAGE 31 ---
Hive’s SQL friendliness means that it can be used as a point of inte‐
gration with the vast universe of database tools capable of making
connections via JBDC or ODBC database drivers.
Coordination and Workflow: Zookeeper and
Oozie
With a growing family of services running as part of a Hadoop cluster,
there’s a need for coordination and naming services. As computing
nodes can come and go, members of the cluster need to synchronize
with each other, know where to access services, and how they should
be configured. This is the purpose of Zookeeper.
Production systems utilizing Hadoop can often contain complex pipe‐
lines of transformations, each with dependencies on each other. For
example, the arrival of a new batch of data will trigger an import, which
must then trigger recalculates in dependent datasets. The Oozie com‐
ponent provides features to manage the workflow and dependencies,
removing the need for developers to code custom solutions.
Management and Deployment: Ambari and
Whirr
One of the commonly added features incorporated into Hadoop by
distributors such as IBM and Microsoft is monitoring and adminis‐
tration. Though in an early stage, Ambari aims to add these features
to the core Hadoop project. Ambari is intended to help system ad‐
ministrators deploy and configure Hadoop, upgrade clusters, and
monitor services. Through an API it may be integrated with other
system management tools.
Though not strictly part of Hadoop, Whirr is a highly complementary
component. It offers a way of running services, including Hadoop, on
cloud platforms. Whirr is cloud-neutral, and currently supports the
Amazon EC2 and Rackspace services.
Machine Learning: Mahout
Every organization’s data are diverse and particular to their needs.
However, there is much less diversity in the kinds of analyses per‐
formed on that data. The Mahout project is a library of Hadoop im‐
Coordination and Workflow: Zookeeper and Oozie 
| 
21

--- PAGE 32 ---
plementations of common analytical computations. Use cases include
user collaborative filtering, user recommendations, clustering and
classification.
Using Hadoop
Normally, you will use Hadoop in the form of a distribution. Much as
with Linux before it, vendors integrate and test the components of the
Apache Hadoop ecosystem, and add in tools and administrative fea‐
tures of their own.
Though not per se a distribution, a managed cloud installation of Ha‐
doop’s MapReduce is also available through Amazon’s Elastic MapRe‐
duce service.
22 
| 
Chapter 3: Apache Hadoop

--- PAGE 33 ---
CHAPTER 4
Big Data Market Survey
By Edd Dumbill
The big data ecosystem can be confusing. The popularity of “big data”
as industry buzzword has created a broad category. As Hadoop steam‐
rolls through the industry, solutions from the business intelligence and
data warehousing fields are also attracting the big data label. To con‐
fuse matters, Hadoop-based solutions such as Hive are at the same
time evolving toward being a competitive data warehousing solution.
Understanding the nature of your big data problem is a helpful first
step in evaluating potential solutions. Let’s remind ourselves of the
definition of big data:
“Big data is data that exceeds the processing capacity of conventional
database systems. The data is too big, moves too fast, or doesn’t fit the
strictures of your database architectures. To gain value from this data,
you must choose an alternative way to process it.”
Big data problems vary in how heavily they weigh in on the axes of
volume, velocity and variability. Predominantly structured yet large
data, for example, may be most suited to an analytical database ap‐
proach.
This survey makes the assumption that a data warehousing solution
alone is not the answer to your problems, and concentrates on ana‐
lyzing the commercial Hadoop ecosystem. We’ll focus on the solutions
that incorporate storage and data processing, excluding those prod‐
ucts which only sit above those layers, such as the visualization or
analytical workbench software.
Getting started with Hadoop doesn’t require a large investment as the
software is open source, and is also available instantly through the
23

--- PAGE 34 ---
Amazon Web Services cloud. But for production environments, sup‐
port, professional services and training are often required.
Just Hadoop?
Apache Hadoop is unquestionably the center of the latest iteration of
big data solutions. At its heart, Hadoop is a system for distributing
computation among commodity servers. It is often used with the Ha‐
doop Hive project, which layers data warehouse technology on top of
Hadoop, enabling ad-hoc analytical queries.
Big data platforms divide along the lines of their approach to Hadoop.
The big data offerings from familiar enterprise vendors incorporate a
Hadoop distribution, while other platforms offer Hadoop connectors
to their existing analytical database systems. This latter category tends
to comprise massively parallel processing (MPP) databases that made
their name in big data before Hadoop matured: Vertica and Aster Data.
Hadoop’s strength in these cases is in processing unstructured data in
tandem with the analytical capabilities of the existing database on
structured or structured data.
Practical big data implementations don’t in general fall neatly into ei‐
ther structured or unstructured data categories. You will invariably
find Hadoop working as part of a system with a relational or MPP
database.
Much as with Linux before it, no Hadoop solution incorporates the
raw Apache Hadoop code. Instead, it’s packaged into distributions. At
a minimum, these distributions have been through a testing process,
and often include additional components such as management and
monitoring tools. The most well-used distributions now come from
Cloudera, Hortonworks and MapR. Not every distribution will be
commercial, however: the BigTop project aims to create a Hadoop
distribution under the Apache umbrella.
Integrated Hadoop Systems
The leading Hadoop enterprise software vendors have aligned their
Hadoop products with the rest of their database and analytical offer‐
ings. These vendors don’t require you to source Hadoop from another
party, and offer it as a core part of their big data solutions. Their of‐
ferings integrate Hadoop into a broader enterprise setting, augmented
by analytical and workflow tools.
24 
| 
Chapter 4: Big Data Market Survey

--- PAGE 35 ---
EMC Greenplum
EMC Greenplum
Database
• Greenplum Database
Deployment options
• Appliance (Modular Data Computing Appliance), Software (En‐
terprise Linux)
Hadoop
• Bundled distribution (Greenplum HD); Hive, Pig, Zookeeper,
HBase
NoSQL component
• HBase
Links
• Home page, case study
Acquired by EMC, and rapidly taken to the heart of the company’s
strategy, Greenplum is a relative newcomer to the enterprise, com‐
pared to other companies in this section. They have turned that to
their advantage in creating an analytic platform, positioned as taking
analytics “beyond BI” with agile data science teams.
Greenplum’s Unified Analytics Platform (UAP) comprises three ele‐
ments: the Greenplum MPP database, for structured data; a Hadoop
distribution, Greenplum HD; and Chorus, a productivity and group‐
ware layer for data science teams.
The HD Hadoop layer builds on MapR’s Hadoop compatible distri‐
bution, which replaces the file system with a faster implementation
and provides other features for robustness. Interoperability between
HD and Greenplum Database means that a single query can access
both database and Hadoop data.
Integrated Hadoop Systems 
| 
25

--- PAGE 36 ---
Chorus is a unique feature, and is indicative of Greenplum’s commit‐
ment to the idea of data science and the importance of the agile team
element to effectively exploiting big data. It supports organizational
roles from analysts, data scientists and DBAs through to executive
business stakeholders.
As befits EMC’s role in the data center market, Greenplum’s UAP is
available in a modular appliance configuration.
IBM
IBM InfoSphere
Database
• DB2
Deployment options
• Software (Enterprise Linux), Cloud
Hadoop
• Bundled distribution (InfoSphere BigInsights); Hive, Oozie, Pig,
Zookeeper, Avro, Flume, HBase, Lucene
NoSQL component
• HBase
Links
• Home page, case study
IBM’s InfoSphere BigInsights is their Hadoop distribution, and part
of a suite of products offered under the “InfoSphere” information
management brand. Everything big data at IBM is helpfully labeled
Big, appropriately enough for a company affectionately known as “Big
Blue.”
BigInsights augments Hadoop with a variety of features, including
management and administration tools. It also offers textual analysis
26 
| 
Chapter 4: Big Data Market Survey

--- PAGE 37 ---
tools that aid with entity resolution—identifying people, addresses,
phone numbers, and so on.
IBM’s Jaql query language provides a point of integration between
Hadoop and other IBM products, such as relational databases or Ne‐
tezza data warehouses.
InfoSphere BigInsights is interoperable with IBM’s other database and
warehouse products, including DB2, Netezza and its InfoSphere ware‐
house and analytics lines. To aid analytical exploration, BigInsights
ships with BigSheets, a spreadsheet interface onto big data.
IBM addresses streaming big data separately through its InfoSphere
Streams product. BigInsights is not currently offered in an appliance
form, but can be used in the cloud via Rightscale, Amazon, Rackspace,
and IBM Smart Enterprise Cloud.
Microsoft
Microsoft
Database
• SQL Server
Deployment options
• Software (Windows Server), Cloud (Windows Azure Cloud)
Hadoop
• Bundled distribution (Big Data Solution); Hive, Pig
Links
• Home page, case study
Microsoft have adopted Hadoop as the center of their big data offering,
and are pursuing an integrated approach aimed at making big data
available through their analytical tool suite, including to the familiar
tools of Excel and PowerPivot.
Integrated Hadoop Systems 
| 
27

--- PAGE 38 ---
Microsoft’s Big Data Solution brings Hadoop to the Windows Server
platform, and in elastic form to their cloud platform Windows Azure.
Microsoft have packaged their own distribution of Hadoop, integrated
with Windows Systems Center and Active Directory. They intend to
contribute back changes to Apache Hadoop to ensure that an open
source version of Hadoop will run on Windows.
On the server side, Microsoft offer integrations to their SQL Server
database and their data warehouse product. Using their warehouse
solutions aren’t mandated, however. The Hadoop Hive data warehouse
is part of the Big Data Solution, including connectors from Hive to
ODBC and Excel.
Microsoft’s focus on the developer is evident in their creation of a
JavaScript API for Hadoop. Using JavaScript, developers can create
Hadoop jobs for MapReduce, Pig or Hive, even from a browser-based
environment. Visual Studio and .NET integration with Hadoop is also
provided.
Deployment is possible either on the server or in the cloud, or as a
hybrid combination. Jobs written against the Apache Hadoop distri‐
bution should migrate with miniminal changes to Microsoft’s envi‐
ronment.
Oracle
Oracle Big Data
Deployment options
• Appliance (Oracle Big Data Appliance)
Hadoop
• Bundled distribution (Cloudera’s Distribution including Apache
Hadoop); Hive, Oozie, Pig, Zookeeper, Avro, Flume, HBase,
Sqoop, Mahout, Whirr
NoSQL component
• Oracle NoSQL Database
Links
28 
| 
Chapter 4: Big Data Market Survey

--- PAGE 39 ---
• Home page
Announcing their entry into the big data market at the end of 2011,
Oracle is taking an appliance-based approach. Their Big Data Appli‐
ance integrates Hadoop, R for analytics, a new Oracle NoSQL database,
and connectors to Oracle’s database and Exadata data warehousing
product line.
Oracle’s approach caters to the high-end enterprise market, and par‐
ticularly leans to the rapid-deployment, high-performance end of the
spectrum. It is the only vendor to include the popular R analytical
language integrated with Hadoop, and to ship a NoSQL database of
their own design as opposed to Hadoop HBase.
Rather than developing their own Hadoop distribution, Oracle have
partnered with Cloudera for Hadoop support, which brings them a
mature and established Hadoop solution. Database connectors again
promote the integration of structured Oracle data with the unstruc‐
tured data stored in Hadoop HDFS.
Oracle’s NoSQL Database is a scalable key-value database, built on the
Berkeley DB technology. In that, Oracle owes double gratitude to
Cloudera CEO Mike Olson, as he was previously the CEO of Sleepycat,
the creators of Berkeley DB. Oracle are positioning their NoSQL da‐
tabase as a means of acquiring big data prior to analysis.
The Oracle R Enterprise product offers direct integration into the
Oracle database, as well as Hadoop, enabling R scripts to run on data
without having to round-trip it out of the data stores.
Availability
While IBM and Greenplum’s offerings are available at the time of
writing, the Microsoft and Oracle solutions are expected to be fully
available early in 2012.
Analytical Databases with Hadoop
Connectivity
MPP (massively parallel processing) databases are specialized for pro‐
cessing structured big data, as distinct from the unstructured data that
is Hadoop’s specialty. Along with Greenplum, Aster Data and Vertica
Analytical Databases with Hadoop Connectivity 
| 
29

--- PAGE 40 ---
are early pioneers of big data products before the mainstream emer‐
gence of Hadoop.
These MPP solutions are databases specialized for analyical workloads
and data integration, and provide connectors to Hadoop and data
warehouses. A recent spate of acquisitions have seen these products
become the analytical play by data warehouse and storage vendors:
Teradata acquired Aster Data, EMC acquired Greenplum, and HP ac‐
quired Vertica.
Quick facts
Aster Data
ParAccel
Vertica
Database
• MPP analytical database
Database
• MPP analytical
database
Database
• MPP analytical database
Deployment options
• Appliance (Aster
MapReduce Appliance),
Software (Enterprise
Linux), Cloud (Amazon EC2,
Terremark and Dell Clouds)
Deployment options
• Software (Enterprise
Linux), Cloud (Cloud
Edition)
Deployment options
• Appliance (HP Vertica
Appliance), Software
(Enterprise Linux), Cloud
(Cloud and Virtualized)
Hadoop
• Hadoop connector
available
Hadoop
• Hadoop integration
available
Hadoop
• Hadoop and Pig connectors
available
Links
• Home page
Links
• Home page, case study
Links
• Home page, case study
Hadoop-Centered Companies
Directly employing Hadoop is another route to creating a big data
solution, especially where your infrastructure doesn’t fall neatly into
the product line of major vendors. Practically every database now fea‐
tures Hadoop connectivity, and there are multiple Hadoop distribu‐
tions to choose from.
Reflecting the developer-driven ethos of the big data world, Hadoop
distributions are frequently offered in a community edition. Such ed‐
itions lack enterprise management features, but contain all the func‐
tionality needed for evaluation and development.
30 
| 
Chapter 4: Big Data Market Survey

--- PAGE 41 ---
The first iterations of Hadoop distributions, from Cloudera and IBM,
focused on usability and adminstration. We are now seeing the addi‐
tion of performance-oriented improvements to Hadoop, such as those
from MapR and Platform Computing. While maintaining API com‐
patibility, these vendors replace slow or fragile parts of the Apache
distribution with better performing or more robust components.
Cloudera
The longest-established provider of Hadoop distributions, Cloudera
provides an enterprise Hadoop solution, alongside services, training
and support options. Along with Yahoo, Cloudera have made deep
open source contributions to Hadoop, and through hosting industry
conferences have done much to establish Hadoop in its current posi‐
tion.
Hortonworks
Though a recent entrant to the market, Hortonworks have a long his‐
tory with Hadoop. Spun off from Yahoo, where Hadoop originated,
Hortonworks aims to stick close to and promote the core Apache Ha‐
doop technology. Hortonworks also have a partnership with Microsoft
to assist and accelerate their Hadoop integration.
Hortonworks Data Platform is currently in a limited preview phase,
with a public preview expected in early 2012. The company also pro‐
vides support and training.
An overview of Hadoop distributions (part 1)
 
Cloudera
EMC Greenplum
Hortonworks
IBM
Product Name
Cloudera’s
Distribution
including Apache
Hadoop
Greenplum HD
Hortonworks
Data Platform
InfoSphere
BigInsights
Free Edition
CDH
Integrated, tested
distribution of
Apache Hadoop
Community
Edition
100% open source
certified and
supported version
of the Apache
Hadoop stack
 
Basic Edition
An integrated
Hadoop
distribution.
Hadoop-Centered Companies 
| 
31

--- PAGE 42 ---
 
Cloudera
EMC Greenplum
Hortonworks
IBM
Enterprise
Edition
Cloudera
Enterprise
Adds
management
software layer
over CDH
Enterprise Edition
Integrates MapR’s
M5 Hadoop-
compatible
distribution,
replaces HDFS
with MapR’s
C++-based file
system. Includes
MapR
management
tools
 
Enterprise Edition
Hadoop
distribution, plus
BigSheets
spreadsheet
interface,
scheduler, text
analytics, indexer,
JDBC connector,
security support.
Hadoop
Components
Hive, Oozie, Pig,
Zookeeper, Avro,
Flume, HBase,
Sqoop, Mahout,
Whirr
Hive, Pig,
Zookeeper, HBase
Hive, Pig,
Zookeeper,
HBase, None,
Ambari
Hive, Oozie, Pig,
Zookeeper, Avro,
Flume, HBase,
Lucene
Security
Cloudera
Manager
Kerberos, role-
based
administration
and audit trails
 
 
Security features
LDAP
authentication,
role-based
authorization,
reverse proxy
Admin
Interface
Cloudera
Manager
Centralized
management and
alerting
Administrative
interfaces
MapR Heatmap
cluster
administrative
tools
Apache Ambari
Monitoring,
administration
and lifecycle
management for
Hadoop clusters
Administrative
interfaces
Administrative
features including
Hadoop HDFS and
MapReduce
administration,
cluster and server
management, view
HDFS file content
Job
Management
Cloudera Manager
Job analytics,
monitoring and
log search
High-availability
job management
JobTracker HA and
Distributed
NameNode HA
prevent lost jobs,
restarts and
failover incidents
Apache Ambari
Monitoring,
administration
and lifecycle
management for
Hadoop clusters
Job management
features
Job creation,
submission,
cancellation, status,
logging.
Database
connectors
 
Greenplum
Database
 
DB2, Netezza,
InfoSphere
Warehouse
32 
| 
Chapter 4: Big Data Market Survey

--- PAGE 43 ---
 
Cloudera
EMC Greenplum
Hortonworks
IBM
Interop
features
 
 
 
 
HDFS Access
Fuse-DFS
Mount HDFS as a
traditional
filesystem
NFS
Access HDFS as a
conventional
network file
system
WebHDFS
REST API to HDFS
 
Installation
Cloudera Manager
Wizard-based
deployment
 
 
Quick installation
GUI-driven
installation tool
Additional APIs
 
 
 
Jaql
Jaql is a functional,
declarative query
language designed
to process large
data sets.
Volume
Management
 
 
 
 
An overview of Hadoop distributions (part 2)
 
MapR
Microsoft
Platform Computing
Product Name
MapR
Big Data Solution
Platform MapReduce
Free Edition
MapR M3 Edition
Free community edition
incorporating MapR’s
performance increases
 
Platform MapReduce
Developer Edition
Evaluation edition,
excludes resource
management features
of regualt edition
Enterprise
Edition
MapR M5 Edition
Augments M3 Edition with
high availability and data
protection features
Big Data Solution
Windows Hadoop
distribution,
integrated with
Microsoft’s database
and analytical
products
Platform MapReduce
Enhanced runtime for
Hadoop MapReduce,
API-compatible with
Apache Hadoop
Hadoop
Components
Hive, Pig, Flume, HBase,
Sqoop, Mahout, None, Oozie
Hive, Pig
 
Security
 
Active Directory
integration
 
Hadoop-Centered Companies 
| 
33

--- PAGE 44 ---
 
MapR
Microsoft
Platform Computing
Admin Interface
Administrative interfaces
MapR Heatmap cluster
administrative tools
System Center
integration
Administrative
interfaces
Platform MapReduce
Workload Manager
Job Management
High-availability job
management
JobTracker HA and
Distributed NameNode HA
prevent lost jobs, restarts
and failover incidents
 
 
Database
connectors
 
SQL Server, SQL Server
Parallel Data
Warehouse
 
Interop features
 
Hive ODBC Driver,
Excel Hive Add-in
 
HDFS Access
NFS
Access HDFS as a
conventional network file
system
 
 
Installation
 
 
 
Additional APIs
REST API
JavaScript API
JavaScript Map/
Reduce jobs, Pig-
Latin, and Hive queries
Includes R, C/C++, C#,
Java, Python
Volume
Management
Mirroring, snapshots
 
 
Notes
• Pure cloud solutions: Both Amazon Web Services and Google
offer cloud-based big data solutions. These will be reviewed sep‐
arately.
• HPCC: Though dominant, Hadoop is not the only big data solu‐
tion. LexisNexis’ HPCC offers an alternative approach.
• Hadapt: not yet featured in this survey. Taking a different ap‐
proach from both Hadoop-centered and MPP solutions, Hadapt
integrates unstructured and structured data into one product:
wrapping rather than exposing Hadoop. It is currently in “early
access” stage.
34 
| 
Chapter 4: Big Data Market Survey

--- PAGE 45 ---
• NoSQL: Solutions built on databases such as Cassandra, Mon‐
goDB and Couchbase are not in the scope of this survey, though
these databases do offer Hadoop integration.
• Errors and omissions: given the fast-evolving nature of the mar‐
ket and variable quality of public information, any feedback about
errors and omissions from this survey is most welcome. Please
send it to edd+bigdata@oreilly.com.
Notes 
| 
35

--- PAGE 46 ---

--- PAGE 47 ---
CHAPTER 5
Microsoft’s Plan for Big Data
By Edd Dumbill
Microsoft has placed Apache Hadoop at the core of its big data strategy.
It’s a move that might seem surprising to the casual observer, being a
somewhat enthusiastic adoption of a significant open source product.
The reason for this move is that Hadoop, by its sheer popularity, has
become the de facto standard for distributed data crunching. By em‐
bracing Hadoop, Microsoft allows its customers to access the rapidly
growing Hadoop ecosystem and take advantage of a growing talent
pool of Hadoop savvy developers.
Microsoft’s goals go beyond integrating Hadoop into Windows. It in‐
tends to contribute the adaptions it makes back to the Apache Hadoop
project, so that anybody can run a purely open source Hadoop on
Windows.
Microsoft’s Hadoop Distribution
The Microsoft distribution of Hadoop is currently in “Customer Tech‐
nology Preview” phase. This means it is undergoing evaluation in the
field by groups of customers. The expected release time is toward the
middle of 2012, but will be influenced by the results of the technology
preview program.
Microsoft’s Hadoop distribution is usable either on-premise with
Windows Server, or in Microsoft’s cloud platform, Windows Azure.
The core of the product is in the MapReduce, HDFS, Pig and Hive
components of Hadoop. These are certain to ship in the 1.0 release.
37

--- PAGE 48 ---
As Microsoft’s aim is for 100% Hadoop compatibility, it is likely that
additional components of the Hadoop ecosystem such as Zookeeper,
HBase, HCatalog and Mahout will also be shipped.
Additional components integrate Hadoop with Microsoft’s ecosystem
of business intelligence and analytical products:
• Connectors for Hadoop, integrating it with SQL Server and SQL
Sever Parallel Data Warehouse.
• An ODBC driver for Hive, permitting any Windows application
to access and run queries against the Hive data warehouse.
• An Excel Hive Add-in, which enables the movement of data di‐
rectly from Hive into Excel or PowerPivot.
On the back end, Microsoft offers Hadoop performance improve‐
ments, integration with Active Directory to facilitate access control,
and with System Center for administration and management.
How Hadoop integrates with the Microsoft ecosystem. (Source: micro‐
soft.com.)
38 
| 
Chapter 5: Microsoft’s Plan for Big Data

--- PAGE 49 ---
Developers, Developers, Developers
One of the most interesting features of Microsoft’s work with Hadoop
is the addition of a JavaScript API. Working with Hadoop at a pro‐
grammatic level can be tedious: this is why higher-level languages such
as Pig emerged.
Driven by its focus on the software developer as an important cus‐
tomer, Microsoft chose to add a JavaScript layer to the Hadoop eco‐
system. Developers can use it to create MapReduce jobs, and even
interact with Pig and Hive from a browser environment.
The real advantage of the JavaScript layer should show itself in inte‐
grating Hadoop into a business environment, making it easy for de‐
velopers to create intranet analytical environments accessible by busi‐
ness users. Combined with Microsoft’s focus on bringing server-side
JavaScript to Windows and Azure through Node.js, this gives an in‐
teresting glimpse into Microsoft’s view of where developer enthusiasm
and talent will lie.
It’s also good news for the broader Hadoop community, as Microsoft
intends to contribute its JavaScript API to the Apache Hadoop open
source project itself.
The other half of Microsoft’s software development environment is of
course the .NET platform. With Microsoft’s Hadoop distribution, it
will be possible to create MapReduce jobs from .NET, though using
the Hadoop APIs directly. It is likely that higher-level interfaces will
emerge in future releases. The same applies to Visual Studio, which
over time will get increasing levels of Hadoop project support.
Streaming Data and NoSQL
Hadoop covers part of the big data problem, but what about streaming
data processing or NoSQL databases? The answer comes in two parts,
covering existing Microsoft products and future Hadoop-compatible
solutions.
Microsoft has some established products: Its streaming data solution
called StreamInsight, and for NoSQL, Windows Azure has a product
called Azure Tables.
Looking to the future, the commitment of Hadoop compatibility
means that streaming data solutions and NoSQL databases designed
Developers, Developers, Developers 
| 
39

--- PAGE 50 ---
to be part of the Hadoop ecosystem should work with the Microsoft
distribution—HBase itself will ship as a core offering. It seems likely
that solutions such as S4 will prove compatible.
Toward an Integrated Environment
Now that Microsoft is on the way to integrating the major components
of big data tooling, does it intend to join it all together to provide an
integrated data science platform for businesses?
That’s certainly the vision, according to Madhu Reddy, senior product
planner for Microsoft Big Data: “Hadoop is primarily for developers.
We want to enable people to use the tools they like.”
The strategy to achieve this involves entry points at multiple levels: for
developers, analysts and business users. Instead of choosing one par‐
ticular analytical platform of choice, Microsoft will focus on intero‐
perability with existing tools. Excel is an obvious priority, but other
tools are also important to the company.
According to Reddy, data scientists represent a spectrum of preferen‐
ces. While Excel is a ubiquitous and popular choice, other customers
use Matlab, SAS, or R, for example.
The Data Marketplace
One thing unique to Microsoft as a big data and cloud platform is its
data market, Windows Azure Marketplace. Mixing external data, such
as geographical or social, with your own, can generate revealing in‐
sights. But it’s hard to find data, be confident of its quality, and pur‐
chase it conveniently. That’s where data marketplaces meet a need.
The availability of the Azure marketplace integrated with Microsoft’s
tools gives analysts a ready source of external data with some guaran‐
tees of quality. Marketplaces are in their infancy now, but will play a
growing role in the future of data-driven business.
Summary
The Microsoft approach to big data has ensured the continuing rele‐
vance of its Windows platform for web-era organizations, and makes
its cloud services a competitive choice for data-centered businesses.
40 
| 
Chapter 5: Microsoft’s Plan for Big Data

--- PAGE 51 ---
Appropriately enough for a company with a large and diverse software
ecosystem of its own, the Microsoft approach is one of interoperability.
Rather than laying out a golden path for big data, as suggested by the
appliance-oriented approach of others, Microsoft is focusing heavily
on integration.
The guarantee of this approach lies in Microsoft’s choice to embrace
and work with the Apache Hadoop community, enabling the migra‐
tion of new tools and talented developers to its platform.
Summary 
| 
41

--- PAGE 52 ---

--- PAGE 53 ---
CHAPTER 6
Big Data in the Cloud
By Edd Dumbill
Big data and cloud technology go hand-in-hand. Big data needs clus‐
ters of servers for processing, which clouds can readily provide. So
goes the marketing message, but what does that look like in reality?
Both “cloud” and “big data” have broad definitions, obscured by con‐
siderable hype. This article breaks down the landscape as simply as
possible, highlighting what’s practical, and what’s to come.
IaaS and Private Clouds
What is often called “cloud” amounts to virtualized servers: computing
resource that presents itself as a regular server, rentable per consump‐
tion. This is generally called infrastructure as a service (IaaS), and is
offered by platforms such as Rackspace Cloud or Amazon EC2. You
buy time on these services, and install and configure your own soft‐
ware, such as a Hadoop cluster or NoSQL database. Most of the solu‐
tions I described in my Big Data Market Survey can be deployed on
IaaS services.
Using IaaS clouds doesn’t mean you must handle all deployment man‐
ually: good news for the clusters of machines big data requires. You
can use orchestration frameworks, which handle the management of
resources, and automated infrastructure tools, which handle server
installation and configuration. RightScale offers a commercial multi-
cloud management platform that mitigates some of the problems of
managing servers in the cloud.
43

--- PAGE 54 ---
Frameworks such as OpenStack and Eucalyptus aim to present a uni‐
form interface to both private data centers and the public cloud. At‐
tracting a strong flow of cross industry support, OpenStack currently
addresses computing resource (akin to Amazon’s EC2) and storage
(parallels Amazon S3).
The race is on to make private clouds and IaaS services more usable:
over the next two years using clouds should become much more
straightforward as vendors adopt the nascent standards. There’ll be a
uniform interface, whether you’re using public or private cloud facili‐
ties, or a hybrid of the two.
Particular to big data, several configuration tools already target Ha‐
doop explicitly: among them Dell’s Crowbar, which aims to make de‐
ploying and configuring clusters simple, and Apache Whirr, which is
specialized for running Hadoop services and other clustered data pro‐
cessing systems.
Today, using IaaS gives you a broad choice of cloud supplier, the option
of using a private cloud, and complete control: but you’ll be respon‐
sible for deploying, managing and maintaining your clusters.
Platform solutions
Using IaaS only brings you so far for with big data applications: they
handle the creation of computing and storage resources, but don’t ad‐
dress anything at a higher level. The set up of Hadoop and Hive or a
similar solution is down to you.
Beyond IaaS, several cloud services provide application layer support
for big data work. Sometimes referred to as managed solutions, or
platform as a service (PaaS), these services remove the need to con‐
figure or scale things such as databases or MapReduce, reducing your
workload and maintenance burden. Additionally, PaaS providers can
realize great efficiencies by hosting at the application level, and pass
those savings on to the customer.
The general PaaS market is burgeoning, with major players including
VMware (Cloud Foundry) and Salesforce (Heroku, force.com). As big
data and machine learning requirements percolate through the in‐
dustry, these players are likely to add their own big-data-specific serv‐
ices. For the purposes of this article, though, I will be sticking to the
vendors who already have implemented big data solutions.
44 
| 
Chapter 6: Big Data in the Cloud

--- PAGE 55 ---
Today’s primary providers of such big data platform services are Am‐
azon, Google and Microsoft. You can see their offerings summarized
in the table toward the end of this article. Both Amazon Web Services
and Microsoft’s Azure blur the lines between infrastructure as a service
and platform: you can mix and match. By contrast, Google’s philoso‐
phy is to skip the notion of a server altogether, and focus only on the
concept of the application. Among these, only Amazon can lay claim
to extensive experience with their product.
Amazon Web Services
Amazon has significant experience in hosting big data processing. Use
of Amazon EC2 for Hadoop was a popular and natural move for many
early adopters of big data, thanks to Amazon’s expandable supply of
compute power. Building on this, Amazon launched Elastic Map Re‐
duce in 2009, providing a hosted, scalable Hadoop service.
Applications on Amazon’s platform can pick from the best of both the
IaaS and PaaS worlds. General purpose EC2 servers host applications
that can then access the appropriate special purpose managed solu‐
tions provided by Amazon.
As well as Elastic Map Reduce, Amazon offers several other services
relevant to big data, such as the Simple Queue Service for coordinating
distributed computing, and a hosted relational database service. At the
specialist end of big data, Amazon’s High Performance Computing
solutions are tuned for low-latency cluster computing, of the sort re‐
quired by scientific and engineering applications.
Elastic Map Reduce
Elastic Map Reduce (EMR) can be programmed in the usual Hadoop
ways, through Pig, Hive or other programming language, and uses
Amazon’s S3 storage service to get data in and out.
Access to Elastic Map Reduce is through Amazon’s SDKs and tools, or
with GUI analytical and IDE products such as those offered by Kar‐
masphere. In conjunction with these tools, EMR represents a strong
option for experimental and analytical work. Amazon’s EMR pricing
makes it a much more attractive option to use EMR, rather than con‐
figure EC2 instances yourself to run Hadoop.
When integrating Hadoop with applications generating structured
data, using S3 as the main data source can be unwieldy. This is because,
Platform solutions 
| 
45

--- PAGE 56 ---
similar to Hadoop’s HDFS, S3 works at the level of storing blobs of
opaque data. Hadoop’s answer to this is HBase, a NoSQL database that
integrates with the rest of the Hadoop stack. Unfortunately, Amazon
does not currently offer HBase with Elastic Map Reduce.
DynamoDB
Instead of HBase, Amazon provides DynamoDB, its own managed,
scalable NoSQL database. As this a managed solution, it represents a
better choice than running your own database on top of EC2, in terms
of both performance and economy.
DynamoDB data can be exported to and imported from S3, providing
interoperability with EMR.
Google
Google’s cloud platform stands out as distinct from its competitors.
Rather than offering virtualization, it provides an application con‐
tainer with defined APIs and services. Developers do not need to con‐
cern themselves with the concept of machines: applications execute in
the cloud, getting access to as much processing power as they need,
within defined resource usage limits.
To use Google’s platform, you must work within the constraints of its
APIs. However, if that fits, you can reap the benefits of the security,
tuning and performance improvements inherent to the way Google
develops all its services.
AppEngine, Google’s cloud application hosting service, offers a Map‐
Reduce facility for parallel computation over data, but this is more of
a feature for use as part of complex applications rather than for ana‐
lytical purposes. Instead, BigQuery and the Prediction API form the
core of Google’s big data offering, respectively offering analysis and
machine learning facilities. Both these services are available exclu‐
sively via REST APIs, consistent with Google’s vision for web-based
computing.
BigQuery
BigQuery is an analytical database, suitable for interactive analysis
over datasets of the order of 1TB. It works best on a small number of
tables with a large number of rows. BigQuery offers a familiar SQL
interface to its data. In that, it is comparable to Apache Hive, but the
46 
| 
Chapter 6: Big Data in the Cloud

--- PAGE 57 ---
typical performance is faster, making BigQuery a good choice for ex‐
ploratory data analysis.
Getting data into BigQuery is a matter of directly uploading it, or im‐
porting it from Google’s Cloud Storage system. This is the aspect of
BigQuery with the biggest room for improvement. Whereas Amazon’s
S3 lets you mail in disks for import, Google doesn’t currently have this
facility. Streaming data into BigQuery isn’t viable either, so regular
imports are required for constantly updating data. Finally, as BigQuery
only accepts data formatted as comma-separated value (CSV) files,
you will need to use external methods to clean up the data beforehand.
Rather than provide end-user interfaces itself, Google wants an eco‐
system to grow around BigQuery, with vendors incorporating it into
their products, in the same way Elastic Map Reduce has acquired tool
integration. Currently in beta test, to which anybody can apply, Big‐
Query is expected to be publicly available during 2012.
Prediction API
Many uses of machine learning are well defined, such as classification,
sentiment analysis, or recommendation generation. To meet these
needs, Google offers its Prediction API product.
Applications using the Prediction API work by creating and training
a model hosted within Google’s system. Once trained, this model can
be used to make predictions, such as spam detection. Google is work‐
ing on allowing these models to be shared, optionally with a fee. This
will let you take advantage of previously trained models, which in
many cases will save you time and expertise with training.
Though promising, Google’s offerings are in their early days. Further
integration between its services is required, as well as time for ecosys‐
tem development to make their tools more approachable.
Microsoft
I have written in some detail about Microsoft’s big data strategy in
Microsoft’s plan for Hadoop and big data. By offering its data platforms
on Windows Azure in addition to Windows Server, Microsoft’s aim is
to make either on-premise or cloud-based deployments equally viable
with its technology. Azure parallels Amazon’s web service offerings in
many ways, offering a mix of IaaS services with managed applications
such as SQL Server.
Platform solutions 
| 
47

--- PAGE 58 ---
Hadoop is the central pillar of Microsoft’s big data approach, surroun‐
ded by the ecosystem of its own database and business intelligence
tools. For organizations already invested in the Microsoft platform,
Azure will represent the smoothest route for integrating big data into
the operation. Azure itself is pragmatic about language choice, sup‐
porting technologies such as Java, PHP and Node.js in addition to
Microsoft’s own.
As with Google’s BigQuery, Microsoft’s Hadoop solution is currently
in closed beta test, and is expected to be generally available sometime
in the middle of 2012.
Big data cloud platforms compared
The following table summarizes the data storage and analysis capa‐
bilities of Amazon, Google and Microsoft’s cloud platforms. Inten‐
tionally excluded are IaaS solutions without dedicated big data offer‐
ings.
 
Amazon
Google
Microsoft
Product(s)
Amazon Web Services
Google Cloud Services
Windows Azure
Big data storage
S3
Cloud Storage
HDFS on Azure
Working storage
Elastic Block Store
AppEngine (Datastore,
Blobstore)
Blob, table, queues
NoSQL database
DynamoDB1
AppEngine Datastore
Table storage
Relational
database
Relational Database
Service (MySQL or Oracle)
Cloud SQL (MySQL
compatible)
SQL Azure
Application
hosting
EC2
AppEngine
Azure Compute
Map/Reduce
service
Elastic MapReduce
(Hadoop)
AppEngine (limited
capacity)
Hadoop on Azure2
Big data analytics
Elastic MapReduce
(Hadoop interface3)
BigQuery2 (TB-scale,
SQL interface)
Hadoop on Azure
(Hadoop interface3)
Machine learning
Via Hadoop + Mahout on
EMR or EC2
Prediction API
Mahout with Hadoop
Streaming
processing
Nothing prepackaged: use
custom solution on EC2
Prospective Search API
4
StreamInsight2 (“Project
Austin”)
Data import
Network, physically ship
drives
Network
Network
Data sources
Public Data Sets
A few sample datasets
Windows Azure
Marketplace
48 
| 
Chapter 6: Big Data in the Cloud

--- PAGE 59 ---
 
Amazon
Google
Microsoft
Availability
Public production
Some services in
private beta
Some services in private
beta
Conclusion
Cloud-based big data services offer considerable advantages in re‐
moving the overhead of configuring and tuning your own clusters,
and in ensuring you pay only for what you use. The biggest issue is
always going to be data locality, as it is slow and expensive to ship data.
The most effective big data cloud solutions will be the ones where the
data is also collected in the cloud. This is an incentive to investigate
EC2, Azure or AppEngine as a primary application platform, and an
indicator that PaaS competitors such as Cloud Foundry and Heroku
will have to address big data as a priority.
It is early days yet for big data in the cloud, with only Amazon offering
battle-tested solutions at this point. Cloud services themselves are at
an early stage, and we will see both increasing standardization and
innovation over the next two years.
However, the twin advantages of not having to worry about infra‐
structure and economies of scale mean it is well worth investigating
cloud services for your big data needs, especially for an experimental
or green-field project. Looking to the future, there’s no doubt that big
data analytical capability will form an essential component of utility
computing solutions.
Notes
1 In public beta.
2 In controlled beta test.
3 Hive and Pig compatible.
4 Experimental status.
Conclusion 
| 
49

--- PAGE 60 ---

--- PAGE 61 ---
CHAPTER 7
Data Marketplaces
By Edd Dumbill
The sale of data is a venerable business, and has existed since the mid‐
dle of the 19th century, when Paul Reuter began providing telegraphed
stock exchange prices between Paris and London, and New York
newspapers founded the Associated Press.
The web has facilitated a blossoming of information providers. As the
ability to discover and exchange data improves, the need to rely on
aggregators such as Bloomberg or Thomson Reuters is declining. This
is a good thing: the business models of large aggregators do not readily
scale to web startups, or casual use of data in analytics.
Instead, data is increasingly offered through online marketplaces:
platforms that host data from publishers and offer it to consumers.
This article provides an overview of the most mature data markets,
and contrasts their different approaches and facilities.
What Do Marketplaces Do?
Most of the consumers of data from today’s marketplaces are devel‐
opers. By adding another dataset to your own business data, you can
create insight. To take an example from web analytics: by mixing an
IP address database with the logs from your website, you can under‐
stand where your customers are coming from, then if you add dem‐
ographic data to the mix, you have some idea of their socio-economic
bracket and spending ability.
Such insight isn’t limited to analytic use only, you can use it to provide
value back to a customer. For instance, by recommending restaurants
51

--- PAGE 62 ---
local to the vicinity of a lunchtime appointment in their calendar.
While many datasets are useful, few are as potent as that of location in
the way they provide context to activity.
Marketplaces are useful in three major ways. First, they provide a point
of discoverability and comparison for data, along with indicators of
quality and scope. Second, they handle the cleaning and formatting of
the data, so it is ready for use (often 80% of the work in any data
integration). Finally, marketplaces provide an economic model for
broad access to data that would otherwise prove difficult to either
publish or consume.
In general, one of the important barriers to the development of the
data marketplace economy is the ability of enterprises to store and
make use of the data. A principle of big data is that it’s often easier to
move your computation to the data, rather than the reverse. Because
of this, we’re seeing the increasing integration between cloud com‐
puting facilities and data markets: Microsoft’s data market is tied to its
Azure cloud, and Infochimps offers hosted compute facilities. In
short-term cases, it’s probably easier to export data from your business
systems to a cloud platform than to try and expand internal systems
to integrate external sources.
While cloud solutions offer a route forward, some marketplaces also
make the effort to target end-users. Microsoft’s data marketplace can
be accessed directly through Excel, and DataMarket provides online
visualization and exploration tools.
The four most established data marketplaces are Infochimps, Factual,
Microsoft Windows Azure Data Marketplace, and DataMarket. A
table comparing these providers is presented at the end of this article,
and a brief discussion of each marketplace follows.
Infochimps
According to founder Flip Kromer, Infochimps was created to give
data life in the same way that code hosting projects such as Source‐
Forge or GitHub give life to code. You can improve code and share it:
Kromer wanted the same for data. The driving goal behind Infochimps
is to connect every public and commercially available database in the
world to a common platform.
Infochimps realized that there’s an important network effect of “data
with the data,” that the best way to build a data commons and a data
52 
| 
Chapter 7: Data Marketplaces

--- PAGE 63 ---
marketplace is to put them together in the same place. The proximity
of other data makes all the data more valuable, because of the ease with
which it can be found and combined.
The biggest challenge in the two years Infochimps has been operating
is that of bootstrapping: a data market needs both supply and demand.
Infochimps’ approach is to go for a broad horizontal range of data,
rather than specialize. According to Kromer, this is because they view
data’s value as being in the context it provides: in giving users more
insight about their own data. To join up data points into a context,
common identities are required (for example, a web page view can be
given a geographical location by joining up the IP address of the page
request with that from the IP address in an IP intelligence database).
The benefit of common identities and data integration is where host‐
ing data together really shines, as Infochimps only needs to integrate
the data once for customers to reap continued benefit: Infochimps sells
datasets which are pre-cleaned and integrated mash-ups of those from
their providers.
By launching a big data cloud hosting platform alongside its market‐
place, Infochimps is seeking to build on the importance of data locality.
Factual
Factual was envisioned by founder and CEO Gil Elbaz as an open data
platform, with tools that could be leveraged by community contribu‐
tors to improve data quality. The vision is very similar to that of In‐
fochimps, but in late 2010 Factual elected to concentrate on one area
of the market: geographical and place data. Rather than pursue a broad
strategy, the idea is to become a proven and trusted supplier in one
vertical, then expand. With customers such as Facebook, Factual’s
strategy is paying off.
According to Elbaz, Factual will look to expand into verticals other
than local information in 2012. It is moving one vertical at a time due
to the marketing effort required in building quality community and
relationships around the data.
Unlike the other main data markets, Factual does not offer reselling
facilities for data publishers. Elbaz hasn’t found that the cash on offer
is attractive enough for many organizations to want to share their data.
Instead, he believes that the best way to get data you want is to trade
other data, which could provide business value far beyond the returns
Factual 
| 
53

--- PAGE 64 ---
of publishing data in exchange for cash. Factual offer incentives to
their customers to share data back, improving the quality of the data
for everybody.
Windows Azure Data Marketplace
Launched in 2010, Microsoft’s Windows Azure Data Marketplace sits
alongside the company’s Applications marketplace as part of the Azure
cloud platform. Microsoft’s data market is positioned with a very
strong integration story, both at the cloud level and with end-user
tooling.
Through use of a standard data protocol, OData, Microsoft offers a
well-defined web interface for data access, including queries. As a re‐
sult, programs such as Excel and PowerPivot can directly access mar‐
ketplace data: giving Microsoft a strong capability to integrate external
data into the existing tooling of the enterprise. In addition, OData
support is available for a broad array of programming languages.
Azure Data Marketplace has a strong emphasis on connecting data
consumers to publishers, and most closely approximates the popular
concept of an “iTunes for Data.” Big name data suppliers such as Dun
& Bradstreet and ESRI can be found among the publishers. The mar‐
ketplace contains a good range of data across many commercial use
cases, and tends to be limited to one provider per dataset—Microsoft
has maintained a strong filter on the reliability and reputation of its
suppliers.
DataMarket
Where the other three main data marketplaces put a strong focus on
the developer and IT customers, DataMarket caters to the end-user as
well. Realizing that interacting with bland tables wasn’t engaging users,
founder Hjalmar Gislason worked to add interactive visualization to
his platform.
The result is a data marketplace that is immediately useful for re‐
searchers and analysts. The range of DataMarket’s data follows this
audience too, with a strong emphasis on country data and economic
indicators. Much of the data is available for free, with premium data
paid at the point of use.
54 
| 
Chapter 7: Data Marketplaces

--- PAGE 65 ---
DataMarket has recently made a significant play for data publishers,
with the emphasis on publishing, not just selling data. Through a va‐
riety of plans, customers can use DataMarket’s platform to publish and
sell their data, and embed charts in their own pages. At the enterprise
end of their packages, DataMarket offers an interactive branded data
portal integrated with the publisher’s own web site and user
authentication system. Initial customers of this plan include Yankee
Group and Lux Research.
Data Markets Compared
 
Azure
Datamarket
Factual
Infochimps
Data sources
Broad range
Range, with a focus
on country and
industry stats
Geo-specialized,
some other
datasets
Range, with a
focus on geo,
social and web
sources
Free data
Yes
Yes
-
Yes
Free trials of
paid data
Yes
-
Yes, limited free
use of APIs
-
Delivery
OData API
API, downloads
API, downloads
for heavy users
API, downloads
Application
hosting
Windows Azure
-
-
Infochimps
Platform
Previewing
Service Explorer
Interactive
visualization
Interactive search
-
Tool
integration
Excel, PowerPivot,
Tableau and other
OData consumers
-
Developer tool
integrations
-
Data
publishing
Via database
connection or web
service
Upload or web/
database
connection.
Via upload or web
service.
Upload
Data reselling
Yes, 20%
commission on
non-free datasets
Yes. Fees and
commissions vary.
Ability to create
branded data
market
-
Yes. 30%
commission on
non-free
datasets.
Launched
2010
2010
2007
2009
Other Data Suppliers
While this article has focused on the more general purpose market‐
places, several other data suppliers are worthy of note.
Data Markets Compared 
| 
55

--- PAGE 66 ---
Social data—Gnip and Datasift specialize in offering social media data
streams, in particular Twitter.
Linked data—Kasabi, currently in beta, is a marketplace that is dis‐
tinctive for hosting all its data as Linked Data, accessible via web
standards such as SPARQL and RDF.
Wolfram Alpha—Perhaps the most prolific integrator of diverse da‐
tabases, Wolfram Alpha recently added a Pro subscription level that
permits the end user to download the data resulting from a compu‐
tation.
Mike Loukides is Vice President of Content Strategy for O’Reilly Media,
Inc. He’s edited many highly regarded books on technical subjects that
don’t involve Windows programming. He’s particularly interested in
programming languages, Unix and what passes for Unix these days, and
system and network administration. Mike is the author of “System Per‐
formance Tuning”, and a coauthor of “Unix Power Tools.” Most re‐
cently, he’s been fooling around with data and data analysis, languages
like R, Mathematica, and Octave, and thinking about how to make
books social.
56 
| 
Chapter 7: Data Marketplaces

--- PAGE 67 ---
CHAPTER 8
The NoSQL Movement
By Mike Loukides
In a conversation last year, Justin Sheehy, CTO of Basho, described
NoSQL as a movement, rather than a technology. This description
immediately felt right; I’ve never been comfortable talking about
NoSQL, which when taken literally, extends from the minimalist
Berkeley DB (commercialized as Sleepycat, now owned by Oracle) to
the big iron HBase, with detours into software as fundamentally dif‐
ferent as Neo4J (a graph database) and FluidDB (which defies de‐
scription).
But what does it mean to say that NoSQL is a movement rather than
a technology? We certainly don’t see picketers outside Oracle’s head‐
quarters. Justin said succinctly that NoSQL is a movement for choice
in database architecture. There is no single overarching technical
theme; a single technology would belie the principles of the move‐
ment.
Think of the last 15 years of software development. We’ve gotten very
good at building large, database-backed applications. Many of them
are web applications, but even more of them aren’t. “Software archi‐
tect” is a valid job description; it’s a position to which many aspire. But
what do software architects do? They specify the high level design of
applications: the front end, the APIs, the middleware, the business
logic—the back end? Well, maybe not.
Since the 80s, the dominant back end of business systems has been a
relational database, whether Oracle, SQL Server or DB2. That’s not
much of an architectural choice. Those are all great products, but
they’re essentially similar, as are all the other relational databases. And
57

--- PAGE 68 ---
it’s remarkable that we’ve explored many architectural variations in
the design of clients, front ends, and middleware, on a multitude of
platforms and frameworks, but haven’t until recently questioned the
architecture of the back end. Relational databases have been a given.
Many things have changed since the advent of relational databases:
• We’re dealing with much more data. Although advances in storage
capacity and CPU speed have allowed the databases to keep pace,
we’re in a new era where size itself is an important part of the
problem, and any significant database needs to be distributed.
• We require sub-second responses to queries. In the 80s, most da‐
tabase queries could run overnight as batch jobs. That’s no longer
acceptable. While some analytic functions can still run as over‐
night batch jobs, we’ve seen the Web evolve from static files to
complex database-backed sites, and that requires sub-second re‐
sponse times for most queries.
• We want applications to be up 24/7. Setting up redundant servers
for static HTML files is easy, but a database replication in a com‐
plex database-backed application is another.
• We’re seeing many applications in which the database has to soak
up data as fast (or even much faster) than it processes queries: in
a logging application, or a distributed sensor application, writes
can be much more frequent than reads. Batch-oriented ETL (ex‐
tract, transform, and load) hasn’t disappeared, and won’t, but cap‐
turing high speed data flows is increasingly important.
• We’re frequently dealing with changing data or with unstructured
data. The data we collect, and how we use it, grows over time in
unpredictable ways. Unstructured data isn’t a particularly new
feature of the data landscape, since unstructured data has always
existed, but we’re increasingly unwilling to force a structure on
data a priori.
• We’re willing to sacrifice our sacred cows. We know that consis‐
tency and isolation and other properties are very valuable, of
course. But so are some other things, like latency and availability
and not losing data even if our primary server goes down. The
challenges of modern applications make us realize that sometimes
we might need to weaken one of these constraints in order to
achieve another.
58 
| 
Chapter 8: The NoSQL Movement

--- PAGE 69 ---
These changing requirements lead us to different tradeoffs and com‐
promises when designing software. They require us to rethink what
we require of a database, and to come up with answers aside from the
relational databases that have served us well over the years. So let’s look
at these requirements in somewhat more detail.
Size, Response, Availability
It’s a given that any modern application is going to be distributed. The
size of modern datasets is only one reason for distribution, and not
the most important. Modern applications (particularly web applica‐
tions) have many concurrent users who demand reasonably snappy
response. In their 2009 Velocity Conference talk, Performance Related
Changes and their User Impact, Eric Schurman and Jake Brutlag
showed results from independent research projects at Google and Mi‐
crosoft. Both projects demonstrated imperceptibly small increases in
response time cause users to move to another site; if response time is
over a second, you’re losing a very measurable percentage of your
traffic.
If you’re not building a web application—say you’re doing business
analytics, with complex, time-consumming queries—the world has
changed, and users now expect business analytics to run in something
like real time. Maybe not the sub-second latency required for web
users, but queries that run overnight are no longer acceptable. Queries
that run while you go out for coffee are marginal. It’s not just a matter
of convenience; the ability to run dozens or hundreds of queries per
day changes the nature of the work you do. You can be more experi‐
mental: you can follow through on hunches and hints based on earlier
queries. That kind of spontaneity was impossible when research went
through the DBA at the data warehouse.
Whether you’re building a customer-facing application or doing in‐
ternal analytics, scalability is a big issue. Vertical scalability (buy a
bigger, faster machine) always runs into limits. Now that the laws of
physics have stalled Intel-architecture clock speeds in the 3.5GHz
range, those limits are more apparent than ever. Horizontal scalability
(build a distributed system with more nodes) is the only way to scale
indefinitely. You’re scaling horizontally even if you’re only buying sin‐
gle boxes: it’s been a long time since I’ve seen a server (or even a high-
end desktop) that doesn’t sport at least four cores. Horizontal scala‐
bility is tougher when you’re scaling across racks of servers at a colo‐
Size, Response, Availability 
| 
59

--- PAGE 70 ---
cation facility, but don’t be deceived: that’s how scalability works in the
21st century, even on your laptop. Even in your cell phone. We need
database technologies that aren’t just fast on single servers: they must
also scale across multiple servers.
Modern applications also need to be highly available. That goes
without saying, but think about how the meaning of “availability” has
changed over the years. Not much more than a decade ago, a web
application would have a single HTTP server that handed out static
files. These applications might be data-driven; but “data driven” meant
that a batch job rebuilt the web site overnight, and user transactions
were queued into a batch processing system, again for processing
overnight. Keeping such a system running isn’t terribly difficult. High
availability doesn’t impact the database: if the database is only engaged
in batched rebuilds or transaction processing, the database can crash
without damage. That’s the world for which relational databases were
designed: in the 80s, if your mainframe ran out of steam, you got a
bigger one. If it crashed, you were down. But when databases became
a living, breathing part of the application, availability became an issue.
There is no way to make a single system highly available; as soon as
any component fails, you’re toast. Highly available systems are, by na‐
ture, distributed systems.
If a distributed database is a given, the next question is how much work
a distributed system will require. There are fundamentally two op‐
tions: databases that have to be distributed manually, via sharding; and
databases that are inherently distributed. Relational databases are split
between multiple hosts by manual sharding, or determining how to
partition the datasets based on some properties of the data itself: for
example, first names starting with A-K on one server, L-Z on another.
A lot of thought goes into designing a sharding and replication strategy
that doesn’t impair performance, while keeping the data relatively bal‐
anced between servers. There’s a third option which is essentially a
hybrid: databases that are not inherently distributed, but that are de‐
signed so they can be partitioned easily. MongoDB is an example of a
database that can be sharded easily (or even automatically); HBase,
Riak, and Cassandra are all inherently distributed, with options to
control how replication and distribution work.
What database choices are viable when you need good interactive re‐
sponse? There are two separate issues: read latency and write latency.
For reasonably simple queries on a database with well-designed in‐
dexes, almost any modern database can give decent read latency, even
60 
| 
Chapter 8: The NoSQL Movement

--- PAGE 71 ---
at reasonably large scale. Similarly, just about all modern databases
claim to be able to keep up with writes at high-speed. Most of these
databases, including HBase, Cassandra, Riak, and CouchDB, write
data immediately to an append-only file, which is an extremely effi‐
cient operation. As a result, writes are often significantly faster than
reads.
Whether any particular database can deliver the performance you
need depends on the nature of the application, and whether you’ve
designed the application in a way that uses the database efficiently: in
particular, the structure of queries, more than the structure of the data
itself. Redis is an in-memory database with extremely fast response,
for both read and write operations; but there are a number of tradeoffs.
By default, data isn’t saved to disk, and is lost if the system crashes. You
can configure Redis for durability, but at the cost of some performance.
Redis is also limited in scalability; there’s some replication capability,
but support for clusters is still coming. But if you want raw speed, and
have a dataset that can fit into memory, Redis is a great choice.
It would be nice if there were some benchmarks to cover database
performance in a meaningful sense, but as the saying goes, “there are
lies, damned lies, and benchmarks.” In particular, no small benchmark
can properly duplicate a real test-case for an application that might
reasonably involve dozens (or hundreds) of servers.
Changing Data and Cheap Lunches
NoSQL databases are frequently called “schemaless,” because they
don’t have the formal schema associated with relational databases. The
lack of a formal schema, which typically has to be designed before any
code is written, means that schemaless databases are a better fit for
current software development practices, such as agile development.
Starting from the simplest thing that could possibly work and iterating
quickly in response to customer input doesn’t fit well with designing
an all-encompassing data schema at the start of the project. It’s im‐
possible to predict how data will be used, or what additional data you’ll
need as the project unfolds. For example, many applications are now
annotating their data with geographic information: latitudes and lon‐
gitudes, addresses. That almost certainly wasn’t part of the initial data
design.
How will the data we collect change in the future? Will we be collecting
biometric information along with tweets and foursquare checkins?
Changing Data and Cheap Lunches 
| 
61

--- PAGE 72 ---
Will music sites such as Last.FM and Spotify incorporate factors like
blood pressure into their music selection algorithms? If you think
these scenarios are futuristic, think about Twitter. When it started out,
it just collected bare-bones information with each tweet: the tweet
itself, the Twitter handle, a timestamp, and a few other bits. Over its
five year history, though, lots of metadata has been added: a tweet may
be 140 characters at most, but a couple KB is actually sent to the server,
and all of this is saved in the database. Up-front schema design is a
poor fit in a world where data requirements are fluid.
In addition, modern applications frequently deal with unstructured
data: blog posts, web pages, voice transcripts, and other data objects
that are essentially text. O’Reilly maintains a substantial database of
job listings for some internal research projects. The job descriptions
are chunks of text in natural languages. They’re not unstructured be‐
cause they don’t fit into a schema. You can easily create a JOBDE‐
SCRIPTION column in a table, and stuff text strings into it. It’s that
knowing the data type and where it fits in the overall structure doesn’t
help. What are the questions you’re likely to ask? Do you want to know
about skills, certifications, the employer’s address, the employer’s in‐
dustry? Those are all valid columns for a table, but you don’t know
what you care about in advance; you won’t find equivalent information
in each job description; and the only way to get from the text to the
data is through various forms of pattern matching and classification.
Doing the classification up front, so you could break a job listing down
into skills, certifications, etc., is a huge effort that would largely be
wasted. The guys who work with this data recently had fits disambig‐
uating “Apple Computer” from “apple orchard”; would you even know
this was a problem outside of a concrete research project based on a
concrete question? If you’re just pre-populating an INDUSTRY col‐
umn from raw data, would you notice that lots of computer industry
jobs were leaking into fruit farming? A JOBDESCRIPTION column
doesn’t hurt, but doesn’t help much either; and going further, by trying
to design a schema around the data that you’ll find in the unstructured
text, definitely hurts. The kinds of questions you’re likely to ask have
everything to do with the data itself, and little to do with that data’s
relations to other data.
However, it’s really a mistake to say that NoSQL databases have no
schema. In a document database, such as CouchDB or MongoDB,
documents are key-value pairs. While you can add documents with
differing sets of keys (missing keys or extra keys), or even add keys to
62 
| 
Chapter 8: The NoSQL Movement

--- PAGE 73 ---
documents over time, applications still must know that certain keys
are present to query the database; indexes have to be set up to make
searches efficient. The same thing applies to column-oriented data‐
bases, such as HBase and Cassandra. While any row may have as many
columns as needed, some up-front thought has to go into what col‐
umns are needed to organize the data. In most applications, a NoSQL
database will require less up-front planning, and offer more flexiblity
as the application evolves. As we’ll see, data design revolves more
around the queries you want to ask than the domain objects that the
data represents. It’s not a free lunch; possibly a cheap lunch, but not
free.
What kinds of storage models do the more common NoSQL databases
support? Redis is a relatively simple key-value store, but with a twist:
values can be data structures (lists and sets), not just strings. It supplies
operations for working directly with sets and lists (for example, union
and intersection).
CouchDB and MongoDB both store documents in JSON format,
where JSON is a format originally designed for representating Java‐
Script objects, but now available in many languages. So on one hand,
you can think of CouchDB and MongoDB as object databases; but you
could also think of a JSON document as a list of key-value pairs. Any
document can contain any set of keys, and any key can be associated
with an arbitrarily complex value that is itself a JSON document.
CouchDB queries are views, which are themselves documents in the
database that specify searches. Views can be very complex, and can
use a built-in mapreduce facility to process and summarize results.
Similarly, MongoDB queries are JSON documents, specifying fields
and values to match, and query results can be processed by a builtin
mapreduce. To use either database effectively, you start by designing
your views: what do you want to query, and how. Once you do that, it
will become clear what keys are needed in your documents.
Riak can also be viewed as a document database, though with more
flexibility about document types: it natively handles JSON, XML, and
plain text, and a plug-in architecture allows you to add support for
other document types. Searches “know about” the structure of JSON
and XML documents. Like CouchDB, Riak incorporates mapreduce
to perform complex queries efficiently.
Cassandra and HBase are usually called column-oriented databases,
though a better term is a “sparse row store.” In these databases, the
Changing Data and Cheap Lunches 
| 
63

--- PAGE 74 ---
equivalent to a relational “table” is a set of rows, identified by a key.
Each row consists of an unlimited number of columns; columns are
essentially keys that let you look up values in the row. Columns can be
added at any time, and columns that are unused in a given row don’t
occupy any storage. NULLs don’t exist. And since columns are stored
contiguously, and tend to have similar data, compression can be very
efficient, and searches along a column are likewise efficient. HBase
describes itself as a database that can store billions of rows with mil‐
lions of columns.
How do you design a schema for a database like this? As with the
document databases, your starting point should be the queries you’ll
want to make. There are some radically different possibilities. Con‐
sider storing logs from a web server. You may want to look up the IP
addresses that accessed each URL you serve. The URLs can be the
primary key; each IP address can be a column. This approach will
quickly generate thousands of unique columns, but that’s not a
problem--and a single query, with no joins, gets you all the IP addresses
that accessed a single URL. If some URLs are visited by many ad‐
dresses, and some are only visited by a few, that’s no problem: remem‐
ber that NULLs don’t exist. This design isn’t even conceivable in a
relational database: you can’t have a table that doesn’t have a fixed
number of columns.
Now, let’s make it more complex: you’re writing an ecommerce appli‐
cation, and you’d like to access all the purchases that a given customer
has made. The solution is similar: the column family is organized by
customer ID (primary key), you have columns for first name, last
name, address, and all the normal customer information, plus as many
rows as are needed for each purchase. In a relational database, this
would probably involve several tables and joins; in the NoSQL data‐
bases, it’s a single lookup. Schema design doesn’t go away, but it
changes: you think about the queries you’d like to execute, and how
you can perform those efficiently.
This isn’t to say that there’s no value to normalization, just that data
design starts from a different place. With a relational database, you
start with the domain objects, and represent them in a way that guar‐
antees that virtually any query can be expressed. But when you need
to optimize performance, you look at the queries you actually perform,
then merge tables to create longer rows, and do away with joins wher‐
ever possible. With the schemaless databases, whether we’re talking
about data structure servers, document databases, or column stores,
64 
| 
Chapter 8: The NoSQL Movement

--- PAGE 75 ---
you go in the other direction: you start with the query, and use that to
define your data objects.
The Sacred Cows
The ACID properties (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability)
have been drilled into our heads. But even these come into play as we
start thinking seriously about database architecture. When a database
is distributed, for instance, it becomes much more difficult to achieve
the same kind of consistency or isolation that you can on a single
machine. And the problem isn’t just that it’s “difficult” but rather that
achieving them ends up in direct conflict with some of the reasons to
go distributed. It’s not that properties like these aren’t very important
—they certainly are—but today’s software architects are discovering
that they require the freedom to choose when it might be worth a
compromise.
What about transactions, two-phase commit, and other mechanisms
inherited from big iron legacy databases? If you’ve read almost any
discussion of concurrent or distributed systems, you’ve heard that
banking systems care a lot about consistency: what if you and your
spouse withdraw money from the same account at the same time?
Could you overdraw the account? That’s what ACID is supposed to
prevent. But a few months ago, I was talking to someone who builds
banking software, and he said “If you really waited for each transaction
to be properly committed on a world-wide network of ATMs, trans‐
actions would take so long to complete that customers would walk
away in frustration. What happens if you and your spouse withdraw
money at the same time and overdraw the account? You both get the
money; we fix it up later.”
This isn’t to say that bankers have discarded transactions, two-phase
commit and other database techniques; they’re just smarter about it.
In particular, they’re distinguishing between local consistency and ab‐
solutely global consistency. Gregor Hohpe’s classic article Starbucks
Does Not Use Two-Phase Commit makes a similar point: in an asy‐
chronous world, we have many strategies for dealing with transac‐
tional errors, including write-offs. None of these strategies are any‐
thing like two-phase commit; they don’t force the world into inflexible,
serialized patterns.
The CAP theorem is more than a sacred cow; it’s a law of the Database
universe that can be expressed as “Consistency, Availability, Partition
The Sacred Cows 
| 
65

--- PAGE 76 ---
Tolerance: choose two.” But let’s rethink relational databases in light
of this theorem. Databases have stressed consistency. The CAP theo‐
rem is really about distributed systems, and as we’ve seen, relational
databases were developed when distributed systems were rare and
exotic at best. If you needed more power, you bought a bigger main‐
frame. Availability isn’t an issue on a single server: if it’s up, it’s up, if
it’s down, it’s down. And partition tolerance is meaningless when
there’s nothing to partition. As we saw at the beginning of this article,
distributed systems are a given for modern applications; you won’t be
able to scale to the size and performance you need on a single box. So
the CAP theorem is historically irrelevant to relational databases:
they’re good at providing consistency, and they have been adapted to
provide high availability with some success, but they are hard to par‐
tition without extreme effort or extreme cost.
Since partition tolerance is a fundamental requirement for distributed
applications, it becomes a question of what to sacrifice: consistency or
availability. There have been two approaches: Riak and Cassandra
stress availability, while HBase has stressed consistency. With Cassan‐
dra and Riak, the tradeoff between consistency and availability is
tuneable. CouchDB and MongoDB are essentially single-headed da‐
tabases, and from that standpoint, availability is a function of how long
you can keep the hardware running. However, both have add-ons that
can be used to build clusters. In a cluster, CouchDB and MongoDB
are eventually consistent (like Riak and Cassandra); availability de‐
pends on what you do with the tools they provide. You need to set up
sharding and replication, and use what’s essentially a proxy server to
present a single interface to cluster’s clients. BigCouch is an interesting
effort to integrate clustering into CouchDB, making it more like Riak.
Now that Cloudant has announced that it is merging BigCouch and
CouchDB, we can expect to see clustering become part of the
CouchDB core.
We’ve seen that absolute consistency isn’t a hard requirement for
banks, nor is it the way we behave in our real-world interactions.
Should we expect it of our software? Or do we care more about avail‐
ability?
It depends; the consistency requirements of many social applications
are very soft. You don’t need to get the correct number of Twitter or
Facebook followers every time you log in. If you search, you probably
don’t care if the results don’t contain the comments that were posted
a few seconds ago. And if you’re willing to accept less-than-perfect
66 
| 
Chapter 8: The NoSQL Movement

--- PAGE 77 ---
consistency, you can make huge improvements in performance. In the
world of big-data-backed web applications, with databases spread
across hundreds (or potentially thousands) of nodes, the performance
penalty of locking down a database while you add or modify a row is
huge; if your application has frequent writes, you’re effectively serial‐
izing all the writes and losing the advantage of the distributed database.
In practice, in an “eventually consistent” database, changes typically
propagate to the nodes in tenths of a second; we’re not talking minutes
or hours before the database arrives in a consistent state.
Given that we have all been battered with talk about “five nines” reli‐
ability, and given that it is a big problem for any significant site to be
down, it seems clear that we should prioritize availability over con‐
sistency, right? The architectural decision isn’t so easy, though. There
are many applications in which inconsistency must eventually be dealt
with. If consistency isn’t guaranteed by the database, it becomes a
problem that the application has to manage. When you choose avail‐
ability over consistency, you’re potentially making your application
more complex. With proper replication and failover strategies, a da‐
tabase designed for consistency (such as HBase) can probably deliver
the availability you require; but this is another design tradeoff. Re‐
gardless of the database you’re using, more stringent reliability re‐
quirements will drive you towards exotic engineering. Only you can
decide the right balance for your application; the point isn’t that any
given decision is right or wrong, but that you can (and have to) choose,
and that’s a good thing.
Other features
I’ve completed a survey of the major tradeoffs you need to think about
in selecting a database for a modern big data application. But the major
tradeoffs aren’t the only story. There are many database projects with
interesting features. Here are a some of the ideas and projects I find
most interesting:
• Scripting: Relational databases all come with some variation of the
SQL language, which can be seen as a scripting language for data.
In the non-relational world, a number of scripting languages are
available. CouchDB and Riak support JavaScript, as does Mon‐
goDB. The Hadoop project has spawned a several data scripting
languages that are usuable with HBase, including Pig and Hive.
Other features 
| 
67

--- PAGE 78 ---
The Redis project is experimenting with integrating the Lua
scripting language.
• RESTful interfaces: CouchDB and Riak are unique in offering
RESTful interfaces: interfaces based on HTTP and the architec‐
tural style elaborated in Roy Fielding’s doctoral dissertation and
Restful Web Services. CouchDB goes so far as to serve as a web
application framework. Riak also offers a more traditional pro‐
tocol buffer interface, which is a better fit if you expect a high
volume of small requests.
• Graphs: Neo4J is a special purpose database designed for main‐
taining large graphs: data where the data items are nodes, with
edges representing the connections between the nodes. Because
graphs are extremely flexible data structures, a graph database can
emulate any other kind of database.
• SQL: I’ve been discussing the NoSQL movement, but SQL is a
familiar language, and is always just around the corner. A couple
of startups are working on adding SQL to Hadoop-based data‐
stores: DrawnToScale (which focuses on low-latency, high-
volume web applications) and Hadapt (which focuses on analytics
and bringing data warehousing into the 20-teens). In a few years,
will we be looking at hybrid databases that take advantage of both
relational and non-relational models? Quite possibly.
• Scientific data: Yet another direction comes from SciDB, a data‐
base project aimed at the largest scientific applications (particu‐
larly the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope). The storage model is
based on multi-dimensional arrays. It is designed to scale to hun‐
dreds of petabytes of storage, collecting tens of terabytes per night.
It’s still in the relatively early stages.
• Hybrid architectures: NoSQL is really about architectural choice.
And perhaps the biggest expression of architectural choice is a
hybrid architecture: rather than using a single database technol‐
ogy, mixing and matching technologies to play to their strengths.
I’ve seen a number of applications that use traditional relational
databases for the portion of the data for which the relational model
works well, and a non-relational database for the rest. For exam‐
ple, customer data could go into a relational database, linked to a
non-relational database for unstructured data such as product re‐
views and recommendations. It’s all about flexibility. A hybrid ar‐
68 
| 
Chapter 8: The NoSQL Movement

--- PAGE 79 ---
chitecture may be the best way to integrate “social” features into
more traditional ecommerce sites.
These are only a few of the interesting ideas and projects that are
floating around out there. Roughly a year ago, I counted a couple dozen
non-relational database projects; I’m sure there are several times that
number today. Don’t hesitate to add notes about your own projects in
the comments.
In the End
In a conversation with Eben Hewitt, author of Cassandra: The Defin‐
itive Guide, Eben summarized what you need to think about when
architecting the back end of a data-driven system. They’re the same
issues software architects have been dealing with for years: you need
to think about the whole ecosystems in which the application works;
you need to consider your goals (do you require high availability? fault
tolerance?); you need to consider support options; you need to isolate
what will changes over the life of the application, and separate that
from what remains the same. The big difference is that now there are
options; you don’t have to choose the relational model. There are other
options for building large databases that scale horizontally, are highly
available, and can deliver great performance to users. And these op‐
tions, the databases that make up the NoSQL movement, can often
achieve these goals with greater flexibility and lower cost.
It used to be said that nobody got fired for buying IBM; then nobody
got fired for buying Microsoft; now, I suppose, nobody gets fired for
buying Oracle. But just as the landscape changed for IBM and Micro‐
soft, it’s shifting again, and even Oracle has a NoSQL solution. Rather
than relational databases being the default, we’re moving into a world
where developers are considering their architectural options, and de‐
ciding which products fit their application: how the databases fit into
their programming model, whether they can scale in ways that make
sense for the application, whether they have strong or relatively weak
consistency requirements.
For years, the relational default has kept developers from understand‐
ing their real back-end requirements. The NoSQL movement has giv‐
en us the opportunity to explore what we really require from our da‐
tabases, and to find out what we already knew: there is no one-size-
fits-all solution.
In the End 
| 
69

--- PAGE 80 ---

--- PAGE 81 ---
CHAPTER 9
Why Visualization Matters
By Julie Steele
A Picture Is Worth 1000 Rows
Let’s say you need to understand thousands or even millions of rows
of data, and you have a short time to do it in. The data may come from
your team, in which case perhaps you’re already familiar with what it’s
measuring and what the results are likely to be. Or it may come from
another team, or maybe several teams at once, and be completely un‐
familiar. Either way, the reason you’re looking at it is that you have a
decision to make, and you want to be informed by the data before
making it. Something probably hangs in the balance: a customer, a
product, or a profit.
How are you going to make sense of all that information efficiently so
you can make a good decision? Data visualization is an important an‐
swer to that question.
However, not all visualizations are actually that helpful. You may be
all too familiar with lifeless bar graphs, or line graphs made with soft‐
ware defaults and couched in a slideshow presentation or lengthy
document. They can be at best confusing, and at worst misleading. But
the good ones are an absolute revelation.
The best data visualizations are ones that expose something new about
the underlying patterns and relationships contained within the data.
Understanding those relationships—and so being able to observe
them—is key to good decision-making. The Periodic Table is a classic
testament to the potential of visualization to reveal hidden relation‐
ships in even small data sets. One look at the table, and chemists and
71

--- PAGE 82 ---
middle school students alike grasp the way atoms arrange themselves
in groups: alkali metals, noble gasses, halogens.
If visualization done right can reveal so much in even a small data set
like this, imagine what it can reveal within terabytes or petabytes of
information.
Types of Visualization
It’s important to point out that not all data visualization is created
equal. Just as we have paints and pencils and chalk and film to help us
capture the world in different ways, with different emphases and for
different purposes, there are multiple ways in which to depict the same
data set.
Or, to put it another way, think of visualization as a new set of languages
you can use to communicate. Just as French and Russian and Japanese
are all ways of encoding ideas so that those ideas can be transported
from one person’s mind to another, and decoded again—and just as
certain languages are more conducive to certain ideas—so the various
kinds of data visualization are a kind of bidirectional encoding that lets
ideas and information be transported from the database into your
brain.
Explaining and exploring
An important distinction lies between visualization for exploring and
visualization for explaining. A third category, visual art, comprises
images that encode data but cannot easily be decoded back to the
original meaning by a viewer. This kind of visualization can be beau‐
tiful, but is not helpful in making decisions.
Visualization for exploring can be imprecise. It’s useful when you’re
not exactly sure what the data has to tell you, and you’re trying to get
a sense of the relationships and patterns contained within it for the
first time. It may take a while to figure out how to approach or clean
the data, and which dimensions to include. Therefore, visualization
for exploring is best done in such a way that it can be iterated quickly
and experimented upon, so that you can find the signal within the
noise. Software and automation are your friends here.
Visualization for explaining is best when it is cleanest. Here, the ability
to pare down the information to its simplest form—to strip away the
noise entirely—will increase the efficiency with which a decision-
72 
| 
Chapter 9: Why Visualization Matters

--- PAGE 83 ---
maker can understand it. This is the approach to take once you un‐
derstand what the data is telling you, and you want to communicate
that to someone else. This is the kind of visualization you should be
finding in those presentations and sales reports.
Visualization for explaining also includes infographics and other cat‐
egories of hand-drawn or custom-made images. Automated tools can
be used, but one size does not fit all.
Your Customers Make Decisions, Too
While data visualization is a powerful tool for helping you and others
within your organization make better decisions, it’s important to re‐
member that, in the meantime, your customers are trying to decide
between you and your competitors. Many kinds of data visualization,
from complex interactive or animated graphs to brightly-colored in‐
fographics, can help explain your customers explore and your cus‐
tomer service folks explain.
That’s why kinds of companies and organizations, from GE to Trulia
to NASA, are beginning to invest significant resources in providing
interactive visualizations to their customers and the public. This al‐
lows viewers to better understand the company’s business, and interact
in a self-directed manner with the company’s expertise.
As Big Data becomes bigger, and more companies deal with complex
data sets with dozens of variables, data visualization will become even
more important. So far, the tide of popularity has risen more quickly
than the tide of visual literacy, and mediocre efforts abound, in pre‐
sentations and on the web.
But as visual literacy rises, thanks in no small part to impressive efforts
in major media such as The New York Times and The Guardian, data
visualization will increasingly become a language your customers and
collaborators expect you to speak—and speak well.
Do Yourself a Favor and Hire a Designer
It’s well worth investing in a talented in-house designer, or a team of
designers. Visualization for explaining works best when someone who
understands not only the data itself, but also the principles of design
and visual communication, tailors the graph or chart to the message.
Your Customers Make Decisions, Too 
| 
73

--- PAGE 84 ---
To go back to the language analogy: Google Translate is a powerful
and useful tool for giving you the general idea of what a foreign text
says. But it’s not perfect, and it often lacks nuance. For getting the
overall gist of things, it’s great. But I wouldn’t use it to send a letter to
a foreign ambassador. For something so sensitive, and where precision
counts, it’s worth hiring an experienced human translator.
Since data visualization is like a foreign language, in the same way, hire
an experienced designer for important jobs where precision matters.
If you’re making the kinds of decisions in which your customer, prod‐
uct, or profit hangs in the balance, you can’t afford to base those de‐
cisions on incomplete or misleading representations of the knowledge
your company holds.
Your designer is your translator, and one of the most important links
you and your customers have to your data.
Julie Steele is an editor at O’Reilly Media interested in connecting people
and ideas. She finds beauty in discovering new ways to understand
complex systems, and so enjoys topics related to gathering, storing, an‐
alyzing, and visualizing data. She holds a Master’s degree in Political
Science (International Relations) from Rutgers University.
74 
| 
Chapter 9: Why Visualization Matters

--- PAGE 85 ---
CHAPTER 10
The Future of Big Data
By Edd Dumbill
2011 was the “coming out” year for data science and big data. As the
field matures in 2012, what can we expect over the course of the year?
More Powerful and Expressive Tools for
Analysis
This year has seen consolidation and engineering around improving
the basic storage and data processing engines of NoSQL and Ha‐
doop. That will doubtless continue, as we see the unruly menagerie of
the Hadoop universe increasingly packaged into distributions, appli‐
ances and on-demand cloud services. Hopefully it won’t be long before
that’s dull, yet necessary, infrastructure.
Looking up the stack, there’s already an early cohort of tools directed
at programmers and data scientists (Karmasphere, Datameer), as well
as Hadoop connectors for established analytical tools such as Ta‐
bleau and R. But there’s a way to go in making big data more powerful:
that is, to decrease the cost of creating experiments.
Here are two ways in which big data can be made more powerful.
75

--- PAGE 86 ---
1. Better programming language support. As we consider data, rath‐
er than business logic, as the primary entity in a program, we must
create or rediscover idiom that lets us focus on the data, rather
than abstractions leaking up from the underlying Hadoop ma‐
chinery. In other words: write shorter programs that make it clear
what we’re doing with the data. These abstractions will in turn
lend themselves to the creation of better tools for non-
programmers.
2. We require better support for interactivity. If Hadoop has any
weakness, it’s in the batch-oriented nature of computation it fos‐
ters. The agile nature of data science will favor any tool that per‐
mits more interactivity.
Streaming Data Processing
Hadoop’s batch-oriented processing is sufficient for many use cases,
especially where the frequency of data reporting doesn’t need to be up-
to-the-minute. However, batch processing isn’t always adequate, par‐
ticularly when serving online needs such as mobile and web clients,
or markets with real-time changing conditions such as finance and
advertising.
Over the next few years we’ll see the adoption of scalable frameworks
and platforms for handling streaming, or near real-time, analysis and
processing. In the same way that Hadoop has been borne out of large-
scale web applications, these platforms will be driven by the needs of
large-scale location-aware mobile, social and sensor use.
For some applications, there just isn’t enough storage in the world to
store every piece of data your business might receive: at some point
you need to make a decision to throw things away. Having streaming
computation abilities enables you to analyze data or make decisions
about discarding it without having to go through the store-compute
loop of map/reduce.
Emerging contenders in the real-time framework category include
Storm, from Twitter, and S4, from Yahoo.
76 
| 
Chapter 10: The Future of Big Data

--- PAGE 87 ---
Rise of Data Marketplaces
Your own data can become that much more potent when mixed with
other datasets. For instance, add in weather conditions to your cus‐
tomer data, and discover if there are weather related patterns to your
customers’ purchasing patterns. Acquiring these datasets can be a
pain, especially if you want to do it outside of the IT department, and
with some exactness. The value of data marketplaces is in providing a
directory to this data, as well as streamlined, standardized methods of
delivering it. Microsoft’s direction of integrating its Azure market‐
place right into analytical tools foreshadows the coming convenience
of access to data.
Development of Data Science Workflows and
Tools
As data science teams become a recognized part of companies, we’ll
see a more regularized expectation of their roles and processes. One
of the driving attributes of a successful data science team is its level of
integration into a company’s business operations, as opposed to being
a sidecar analysis team.
Software developers already have a wealth of infrastructure that is both
logistical and social, including wikis and source control, along with
tools that expose their process and requirements to business owners.
Integrated data science teams will need their own versions of these
tools to collaborate effectively. One example of this is EMC Green‐
plum’s Chorus, which provides a social software platform for data sci‐
ence. In turn, use of these tools will support the emergence of data
science process within organizations.
Data science teams will start to evolve repeatable processes, hopefully
agile ones. They could do worse than to look at the ground-breaking
Rise of Data Marketplaces 
| 
77

--- PAGE 88 ---
work newspaper data teams are doing at news organizations such as
The Guardian and New York Times: given short timescales these teams
take data from raw form to a finished product, working hand-in-hand
with the journalist.
Increased Understanding of and Demand for
Visualization
Visualization fulfills two purposes in a data workflow: explanation and
exploration. While business people might think of a visualization as
the end result, data scientists also use visualization as a way of looking
for questions to ask and discovering new features of a dataset.
If becoming a data-driven organization is about fostering a better feel
for data among all employees, visualization plays a vital role in deliv‐
ering data manipulation abilities to those without direct programming
or statistical skills.
Throughout a year dominated by business’ constant demand for data
scientists, I’ve repeatedly heard from data scientists about what they
want most: people who know how to create visualizations.
78 
| 
Chapter 0: The Future of Big Data

