--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
Make Data Work
strataconf.com
Presented by O’Reilly and Cloudera, 
Strata + Hadoop World is where 
cutting-edge data science and new 
business fundamentals intersect—
and merge.
n Learn business applications of 
data technologies
n Develop new skills through 
trainings and in-depth tutorials
n Connect with an international 
community of thousands who 
work with data
Job # 15420

--- PAGE 3 ---
Mike Barlow
Real-Time Big Data
Analytics: Emerging
Architecture

--- PAGE 4 ---
ISBN: 978-1-449-36421-2
Real-Time Big Data Analytics: Emerging Architecture
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2013 O’Reilly Media. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: (800)
998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
February 2013:
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2013-02-25
First release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781449364212 for release details.
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod‐
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and
O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed
in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher
and authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting
from the use of the information contained herein.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Table of Contents
1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
2. How Fast Is Fast?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
3. How Real Is Real Time?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
4. The RTBDA Stack. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
5. The Five Phases of Real Time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
6. How Big Is Big?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
7. Part of a Larger Trend. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
iii

--- PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Imagine that it’s 2007. You’re a top executive at major search engine
company, and Steve Jobs has just unveiled the iPhone. You immediately
ask yourself, “Should we shift resources away from some of our current
projects so we can create an experience expressly for iPhone users?”
Then you begin wondering, “What if it’s all hype? Steve is a great
showman … how can we predict if the iPhone is a fad or the next big
thing?”
The good news is that you’ve got plenty of data at your disposal. The
bad news is that you have no way of querying that data and discovering
the answer to a critical question: How many people are accessing my
sites from their iPhones?
Back in 2007, you couldn’t even ask the question without upgrading
the schema in your data warehouse, an expensive process that might
have taken two months. Your only choice was to wait and hope that a
competitor didn’t eat your lunch in the meantime.
Justin Erickson, a senior product manager at Cloudera, told me a ver‐
sion of that story and I wanted to share it with you because it neatly
illustrates the difference between traditional analytics and real-time
big data analytics. Back then, you had to know the kinds of questions
you planned to ask before you stored your data.
“Fast forward to the present and technologies like Hadoop give you
the scale and flexibility to store data before you know how you are
going to process it,” says Erickson. “Technologies such as MapRe‐
duce, Hive and Impala enable you to run queries without changing the
data structures underneath.”
1

--- PAGE 8 ---
Today, you are much less likely to face a scenario in which you cannot
query data and get a response back in a brief period of time. Analytical
processes that used to require month, days, or hours have been reduced
to minutes, seconds, and fractions of seconds.
But shorter processing times have led to higher expectations. Two
years ago, many data analysts thought that generating a result from a
query in less than 40 minutes was nothing short of miraculous. Today,
they expect to see results in under a minute. That’s practically the speed
of thought — you think of a query, you get a result, and you begin your
experiment.
“It’s about moving with greater speed toward previously unknown
questions, defining new insights, and reducing the time between when
an event happens somewhere in the world and someone responds or
reacts to that event,” says Erickson.
A rapidly emerging universe of newer technologies has dramatically
reduced data processing cycle time, making it possible to explore and
experiment with data in ways that would not have been practical or
even possible a few years ago.
Despite the availability of new tools and systems for handling massive
amounts of data at incredible speeds, however, the real promise of
advanced data analytics lies beyond the realm of pure technology.
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction

--- PAGE 9 ---
“Real-time big data isn’t just a process for storing petabytes or exabytes
of data in a data warehouse,” says Michael Minelli, co-author of Big
Data, Big Analytics. “It’s about the ability to make better decisions and
take meaningful actions at the right time. It’s about detecting fraud
while someone is swiping a credit card, or triggering an offer while a
shopper is standing on a checkout line, or placing an ad on a website
while someone is reading a specific article. It’s about combining and
analyzing data so you can take the right action, at the right time, and
at the right place.”
For some, real-time big data analytics (RTBDA) is a ticket to improved
sales, higher profits and lower marketing costs. To others, it signals the
dawn of a new era in which machines begin to think and respond more
like humans.
Introduction 
| 
3

--- PAGE 10 ---

--- PAGE 11 ---
CHAPTER 2
How Fast Is Fast?
The capability to store data quickly isn’t new. What’s new is the capa‐
bility to do something meaningful with that data, quickly and cost-
effectively. Businesses and governments have been storing huge
amounts of data for decades. What we are witnessing now, however,
is an explosion of new techniques for analyzing those large data sets.
In addition to new capabilities for handling large amounts of data,
we’re also seeing a proliferation of new technologies designed to handle
complex, non-traditional data — precisely the kinds of unstructured
or semi-structured data generated by social media, mobile commu‐
nications, customer service records, warranties, census reports, sen‐
sors, and web logs. In the past, data had to be arranged neatly in tables.
In today’s world of data analytics, anything goes. Heterogeneity is the
new normal, and modern data scientists are accustomed to hacking
their way through tangled clumps of messy data culled from multiple
sources.
Software frameworks such as Hadoop and MapReduce, which support
distributed processing applications across relatively inexpensive com‐
modity hardware, now make it possible to mix and match data from
many disparate sources. Today’s data sets aren’t merely larger than the
older data sets — they’re significantly more complex.
“Big data has three dimensions — volume, variety, and velocity,” says
Minelli. “And within each of those three dimensions is a wide range of
variables.”
5

--- PAGE 12 ---
The ability to manage large and complex sets of data hasn’t diminished
the appetite for more size and greater speed. Every day it seems that a
new technique or application is introduced that pushes the edges of
the speed-size envelope even further.
Druid, for example, is a system for scanning tens of billions of records
per second. It boasts scan speeds of 33 million rows/second/core and
ingest speeds of 10 thousand records/second/node. It can query 6 ter‐
abytes of in-memory data in 1.4 seconds. As Eric Tschetter wrote in
his blog, Druid has “the power to move planetary-size data sets with
speed.”
When systems operate at such blinding velocities, it seems odd to
quibble over a few milliseconds here or there. But Ted Dunning, an
architect at MapR Technologies, raises a concern worth noting. “Many
of the terms used by people are confusing. Some of the definitions are
what I would call squishy. They don’t say, If this takes longer than 2.3
seconds, we’re out. Google, for instance, definitely wants their system
to be as fast as possible and they definitely put real-time constraints
on the internals of their system to make sure that it gives up on certain
approaches very quickly. But overall, the system itself is not real time.
It’s pretty fast, almost all the time. That’s what I mean by a squishy
definition of real time.”
The difference between a hard definition and a “squishy” definition
isn’t merely semantic — it has real-world consequences. For example,
many people don’t understand that real-time online algorithms are
constrained by time and space limitations. If you “unbound” them to
allow more data, they can no longer function as real-time algorithms.
“People need to begin developing an intuition about which kinds of
processing are bounded in time, and which kinds aren’t,” says Dun‐
ning. For example, algorithms that keep unique identifiers of visitors
to a website can break down if traffic suddenly increases. Algorithms
designed to prevent the same email from being resent within seven
days through a system work well until the scale of the system expands
radically.
The Apache Drill project will address the “squishy” factor by scanning
through smaller sets of data very quickly. Drill is the open source
cousin of Dremel, a Google tool that rips through larger data sets at
blazing speeds and spits out summary results, sidestepping the scale
issue.
6 
| 
Chapter 2: How Fast Is Fast?

--- PAGE 13 ---
Dunning is one of the Drill project’s core developers. He sees Drill as
complementary to existing frameworks such as Hadoop. Drill brings
big data analytics a step closer to real-time interactive processing,
which is definitely a step in the right direction.
“Drill takes a slightly different tack than Dremel,” says Dunning. “Drill
is trying to be more things to more people — probably at the cost of
some performance, but that’s just mostly due to the different environ‐
ment. Google is a well-controlled, very well managed data environ‐
ment. But the outside world is a messy place. Nobody is in charge. Data
appears in all kinds of ways and people have all kinds of preferences
for how they want to express what they want, and what kinds of lan‐
guages they want to write their queries in.”
Dunning notes that both Drill and Dremel scan data in parallel. “Using
a variety of online algorithms, they’re able to complete scans — doing
filtering operations, doing aggregates, and so on — in a parallel way,
in a fairly short amount of time. But they basically scan the whole table.
They are both full-table scan tools that perform good aggregation,
good sorting, and good top 40 sorts of measurements.”
In many situations involving big data, random failures and resulting
data loss can become issues. “If I’m bringing data in from many dif‐
ferent systems, data loss could skew my analysis pretty dramatically,”
says Cloudera’s Erickson. “When you have lots of data moving across
multiple networks and many machines, there’s a greater chance that
something will break and portions of the data won’t be available.”
Cloudera has addressed those problems by creating a system of tools,
including Flume and SQOOP, which handle ingestion from multiple
sources into Hadoop, and Impala, which enables real-time, ad hoc
querying of data.
“Before Imapala, you did the machine learning and larger-scale pro‐
cesses in Hadoop, and the ad hoc analysis in Hive, which involves
relatively slow batch processing,” says Erickson. “Alternatively, you can
perform the ad-hoc analysis against a traditional database system,
which limits your ad-hoc exploration to the data that is captured and
loaded into the pre-defined schema. So essentially you are doing ma‐
chine learning on one side, ad hoc querying on the other side, and then
correlating the data between the two systems.”
How Fast Is Fast? 
| 
7

--- PAGE 14 ---
Impala, says Erickson, enables ad hoc SQL analysis “directly on top of
your big data systems. You don’t have to define the schema before you
load the data.”
For example, let’s say you’re a large financial services institution. Ob‐
viously, you’re going to be on the lookout for credit card fraud. Some
kinds of fraud are relatively easy to spot. If a cardholder makes a pur‐
chase in Philadelphia and another purchase 10-minutes later in San
Diego, a fraud alert is triggered. But other kinds of credit card fraud
involve numerous small purchases, across multiple accounts, over long
time periods.
Finding those kinds of fraud requires different analytical approaches.
If you are running traditional analytics on top of a traditional enter‐
prise data warehouse, it’s going to take you longer to recognize and
respond to new kinds of fraud than it would if you had the capabilities
to run ad hoc queries in real time. When you’re dealing with fraud,
every lost minute translates into lost money.
8 
| 
Chapter 2: How Fast Is Fast?

--- PAGE 15 ---
CHAPTER 3
How Real Is Real Time?
Here’s another complication: The meaning of “real time” can vary de‐
pending on the context in which it is used.
“In the same sense that there really is no such thing as truly unstruc‐
tured data, there’s no such thing as real time. There’s only near-real
time,” says John Akred, a senior manager within the data domain of
Accenture’s Emerging Technology Innovations group. “Typically
when we’re talking about real-time or near real-time systems, what we
mean is architectures that allow you to respond to data as you receive
it without necessarily persisting it to a database first.”
In other words, real-time denotes the ability to process data as it ar‐
rives, rather than storing the data and retrieving it at some point in
the future. That’s the primary significance of the term — real-time
means that you’re processing data in the present, rather than in the
future.
But “the present” also has different meanings to different users. From
the perspective of an online merchant, “the present” means the atten‐
tion span of a potential customer. If the processing time of a transaction
exceeds the customer’s attention span, the merchant doesn’t consider
it real time.
From the perspective of an options trader, however, real time means
milliseconds. From the perspective of a guided missile, real time means
microseconds.
For most data analysts, real time means “pretty fast” at the data layer
and “very fast” at the decision layer. “Real time is for robots,” says Joe
9

--- PAGE 16 ---
Hellerstein, chancellor’s professor of computer science at UC Berkeley.
“If you have people in the loop, it’s not real time. Most people take a
second or two to react, and that’s plenty of time for a traditional trans‐
actional system to handle input and output.”
That doesn’t mean that developers have abandoned the quest for speed.
Supported by a Google grant, Matei Zaharia is working on his Ph.D.
at UC Berkeley. He is an author of Spark, an open source cluster com‐
puting system that can be programmed quickly and runs fast. Spark
relies on “resilient distributed datasets” (RDDs) and “can be used to
interactively query 1 to 2 terabytes of data in less than a second.”
In scenarios involving machine learning algorithms and other multi-
pass analytics algorithms, “Spark can run 10x to 100x faster than Ha‐
doop MapReduce,” says Zaharia. Spark is also the engine behind
Shark, a data warehousing system.
According to Zaharia, companies such as Conviva and Quantifind
have written UIs that launch Spark on the back end of analytics dash‐
boards. “You see the statistics on a dashboard and if you’re wondering
about some data that hasn’t been computed, you can ask a question
that goes out to a parallel computation on Spark and you get back an
answer in about half a second.”
Storm is an open source low latency processing stream processing
system designed to integrate with existing queuing and bandwidth
systems. It is used by companies such as Twitter, the Weather Channel,
Groupon and Ooyala. Nathan Marz, lead engineer at BackType (ac‐
quired by Twitter in 2011), is the author of Storm and other open-
source projects such as Cascalog and ElephantDB.
“There are really only two paradigms for data processing: batch and
stream,” says Marz. “Batch processing is fundamentally high-latency.
So if you’re trying to look at a terabyte of data all at once, you’ll never
be able to do that computation in less than a second with batch pro‐
cessing.”
Stream processing looks at smaller amounts of data as they arrive. “You
can do intense computations, like parallel search, and merge queries
on the fly,” says Marz. “Normally if you want to do a search query, you
need to create search indexes, which can be a slow process on one
machine. With Storm, you can stream the process across many ma‐
chines, and get much quicker results.”
10 
| 
Chapter 3: How Real Is Real Time?

--- PAGE 17 ---
Twitter uses Storm to identify trends in near real time. Ideally, says
Marz, Storm will also enable Twitter to “understand someone’s intent
in virtually real time. For example, let’s say that someone tweets that
he’s going snowboarding. Storm would help you figure out which ad
would be most appropriate for that person, at just the right time.”
Storm is also relatively user friendly. “People love Storm because it’s
easy to use. It solves really hard problems such as fault tolerance and
dealing with partial failures in distributed processing. We have a plat‐
form you can build on. You don’t have to focus on the infrastructure
because that work has already been done. You can set up Storm by
yourself and have it running in minutes,” says Marz.
How Real Is Real Time? 
| 
11

--- PAGE 18 ---

--- PAGE 19 ---
CHAPTER 4
The RTBDA Stack
At this moment, it’s clear that an architecture for handling RTBDA is
slowly emerging from a disparate set of programs and tools. What isn’t
clear, however, is what that architecture will look like. One goal of this
paper is sketching out a practical RTBDA roadmap that will serve a
variety of stakeholders including users, vendors, investors, and cor‐
porate executives such as CIOs, CFOs and COOs who make or influ‐
ence purchasing decisions around information technology.
Focusing on the stakeholders and their needs is important because it
reminds us that the RTBDA technology exists for a specific purpose:
creating value from data. It is also important to remember that “value”
and “real time” will suggest different meanings to different subsets of
stakeholders. There is presently no one-size-fits-all model, which
makes sense when you consider that the interrelationships among
people, processes and technologies within the RTBDA universe are
still evolving.
David Smith writes a popular blog for Revolution Analytics on open
source R, a programming language designed specifically for data an‐
alytics. He proposes a four-layer RTBDA technology stack. Although
his stack is geared for predictive analytics, it serves as a good general
model:
13

--- PAGE 20 ---
Figure 4-1. From David Smith’s presentation, “Real-Time Big Data
Analytics: From Deployment To Production”
At the foundation is the data layer. At this level you have structured
data in an RDBMS, NoSQL, Hbase, or Impala; unstructured data in
Hadoop MapReduce; streaming data from the web, social media, sen‐
sors and operational systems; and limited capabilities for performing
descriptive analytics. Tools such as Hive, HBase, Storm and Spark also
sit at this layer. (Matei Zaharia suggests dividing the data layer into
two layers, one for storage and the other for query processing)
14 
| 
Chapter 4: The RTBDA Stack

--- PAGE 21 ---
The analytics layer sits above the data layer. The analytics layer in‐
cludes a production environment for deploying real-time scoring and
dynamic analytics; a development environment for building models;
and a local data mart that is updated periodically from the data layer,
situated near the analytics engine to improve performance.
On top of the analytics layer is the integration layer. It is the “glue” that
holds the end-user applications and analytics engines together, and it
usually includes a rules engine or CEP engine, and an API for dynamic
analytics that “brokers” communication between app developers and
data scientists.
The topmost layer is the decision layer. This is where the rubber meets
the road, and it can include end-user applications such as desktop,
mobile, and interactive web apps, as well as business intelligence soft‐
ware. This is the layer that most people “see.” It’s the layer at which
business analysts, c-suite executives, and customers interact with the
real-time big data analytics system.
Again, it’s important to note that each layer is associated with different
sets of users, and that different sets of users will define “real time”
differently. Moreover, the four layers aren’t passive lumps of technol‐
ogies — each layer enables a critical phase of real-time analytics de‐
ployment.
The RTBDA Stack 
| 
15

--- PAGE 22 ---

--- PAGE 23 ---
CHAPTER 5
The Five Phases of Real Time
Real-time big data analytics is an iterative process involving multiple
tools and systems. Smith says that it’s helpful to divide the process into
five phases: data distillation, model development, validation and de‐
ployment, real-time scoring, and model refresh. At each phase, the
terms “real time” and “big data” are fluid in meaning. The definitions
at each phase of the process are not carved into stone. Indeed, they are
context dependent. Like the technology stack discussed earlier, Smith’s
five-phase process model is devised as a framework for predictive an‐
alytics. But it also works as a general framework for real-time big data
analytics.
1. Data distillation — Like unrefined oil, data in the data layer is
crude and messy. It lacks the structure required for building mod‐
els or performing analysis. The data distillation phase includes
extracting features for unstructured text, combining disparate da‐
ta sources, filtering for populations of interest, selecting relevant
features and outcomes for modeling, and exporting sets of distilled
data to a local data mart.
2. Model development — Processes in this phase include feature
selection, sampling and aggregation; variable transformation;
model estimation; model refinement; and model benchmarking.
The goal at this phase is creating a predictive model that is pow‐
erful, robust, comprehensible and implementable. The key re‐
quirements for data scientists at this phase are speed, flexibility,
17

--- PAGE 24 ---
productivity, and reproducibility. These requirements are critical
in the context of big data: a data scientist will typically construct,
refine and compare dozens of models in the search for a powerful
and robust real-time algorithm.
3. Validation and deployment — The goal at this phase is testing
the model to make sure that it works in the real world. The vali‐
dation process involves re-extracting fresh data, running it against
the model, and comparing results with outcomes run on data that’s
been withheld as a validation set. If the model works, it can be
deployed into a production environment.
4. Real-time scoring — In real-time systems, scoring is triggered by
actions at the decision layer (by consumers at a website or by an
operational system through an API), and the actual communica‐
tions are brokered by the integration layer. In the scoring phase,
some real-time systems will use the same hardware that’s used in
the data layer, but they will not use the same data. At this phase
of the process, the deployed scoring rules are “divorced” from the
data in the data layer or data mart. Note also that at this phase,
the limitations of Hadoop become apparent. Hadoop today is not
particularly well-suited for real-time scoring, although it can be
used for “near real-time” applications such as populating large
tables or pre-computing scores. Newer technologies such as Clou‐
dera’s Impala are designed to improve Hadoop’s real-time capa‐
bilities.
5. Model refresh — Data is always changing, so there needs to be a
way to refresh the data and refresh the model built on the original
data. The existing scripts or programs used to run the data and
build the models can be re-used to refresh the models. Simple
exploratory data analysis is also recommended, along with peri‐
odic (weekly, daily, or hourly) model refreshes. The refresh pro‐
cess, as well as validation and deployment, can be automated using
web-based services such as RevoDeployR, a part of the Revolution
R Enterprise solution.
18 
| 
Chapter 5: The Five Phases of Real Time

--- PAGE 25 ---
Figure 5-1. From David Smith’s presentation, “Real-Time Big Data
Analytics: From Deployment To Production”
A caveat on the refresh phase: Refreshing the model based on re-
ingesting the data and re-running the scripts will only work for a limi‐
ted time, since the underlying data — and even the underlying struc‐
ture of the data — will eventually change so much that the model will
no longer be valid. Important variables can become non-significant,
non-significant variables can become important, and new data sources
are continuously emerging. If the model accuracy measure begins
drifting, go back to phase 2 and re-examine the data. If necessary, go
back to phase 1 and rebuild the model from scratch.
The Five Phases of Real Time 
| 
19

--- PAGE 26 ---

--- PAGE 27 ---
CHAPTER 6
How Big Is Big?
As suggested earlier, the “bigness” of big data depends on its location
in the stack. At the data layer, it is not unusual to see petabytes and
even exabytes of data. At the analytics layer, you’re more likely to en‐
counter gigabytes and terabytes of refined data. By the time you reach
the integration layer, you’re handling megabytes. At the decision layer,
the data sets have dwindled down to kilobytes, and we’re measuring
data less in terms of scale and more in terms of bandwidth.
The takeaway is that the higher you go in the stack, the less data you
need to manage. At the top of the stack, size is considerably less relevant
than speed. Now we’re talking about real-time, and this is where it gets
really interesting.
“If you visit the Huffington Post website, for example, you’ll see a bunch
of ads pop up on the right-hand side of the page,” says Smith. “Those
ads have been selected for you on the basis of information generated
in real time by marketing analytics companies like Upstream Software,
which pulls information from a mash up of multiple sources stored in
Hadoop. Those ads have to be selected and displayed within a fraction
of a second. Think about how often that’s happening. Everybody who’s
browsing the web sees hundreds of ads. You’re talking about an in‐
credible number of transactions occurring every second.”
21

--- PAGE 28 ---

--- PAGE 29 ---
CHAPTER 7
Part of a Larger Trend
The push toward real-time big data analytics is part of a much larger
trend in which the machines we create act less like machines and more
like human beings, says Dhiraj Rajaram, Founder and CEO of Mu-
Sigma, a provider of decision sciences and analytics solutions.
“Today, most of our technology infrastructure is not designed for real
time,” says Rajaram, who worked as a strategy consultant at Booz Allen
Hamilton and Pricewaterhouse Coopers before launching Mu Sigma.
“Our legacy systems are geared for batch processing. We store data in
a central location and when we want a piece of information, we have
to find it, retrieve it and process it. That’s the way most systems work.
But that isn’t the way the human mind works. Human memory is more
like flash memory. We have lots of specific knowledge that’s already
mapped — that’s why we can react and respond much more quickly
than most of our machines. Our intelligence is distributed, not highly
centralized, so more of it resides at the edge. That means we can find
it and retrieve it quicker. Real time is a step toward building machines
that respond to problems the way people do.”
As information technology systems become less monolithic and more
distributed, real-time big data analytics will become less exotic and
more commonplace. The various technologies of data science will be
industrialized, costs will fall and eventually real-time analytics will
become a commodity.
At that point, the focus will shift from data science to the next logical
frontier: decision science. “Even if you have the best real-time analyt‐
ics, you won’t be competitive unless you empower the people in the
23

--- PAGE 30 ---
organization to make the right decisions,” says Rajaram. “The creation
of analytics and the consumption of analytics are two different things.
You need processes for translating the analytics into good decisions.
Right now, everyone thinks that analytics technology is sexy. But the
real challenge isn’t transforming the technology — the real challenge
is transforming the people and the processes. That’s the hard part.”
24 
| 
Chapter 7: Part of a Larger Trend

--- PAGE 31 ---
About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has represented major organizations in numerous indus‐
tries.
Mike is coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media
Strategy (Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The Future of IT
Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers (Wiley, 2007).
He is also the writer of many articles, reports, and white papers on
marketing strategy, marketing automation, customer intelligence,
business performance management, collaborative social networking,
cloud computing, and big data analytics.
Over the course of a long career, Mike was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns ap‐
peared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major U.S. dailies.

