--- PAGE 1 ---
big data - case study collection
1
Case Study 
Collection
Bernard Marr
Amazing 
Companies  
That Really 
Get Big Data
7

--- PAGE 2 ---
big data - case study collection
1
Big Data is a big thing and this case 
study collection will give you a good 
overview of how some companies really 
leverage big data to drive business 
performance. They range from industry 
giants like Google, Amazon, Facebook, 
GE, and Microsoft, to smaller businesses 
which have put big data at the centre of 
their business model, like Kaggle and 
Cornerstone. 
This case study collection is based on 
articles published by Bernard Marr on his 
LinkedIn Influencer blog.
Brought to  
you by the  
bestselling  
author of...
Copyright © 2015 Bernard Marr

--- PAGE 3 ---
2
1
Google
Big data and big business go hand in hand – this is the first in 
a series where I will examine the different uses that the world’s 
leading corporations are making of the endless amount of digital 
information the world is producing every day. 
Google has not only significantly influenced the way we can now 
analyse big data (think MapReduce, BigQuery, etc.) – but they are 
probably more responsible than anyone else for making it part of our 
everyday lives. I believe that many of the innovative things Google is 
doing today, most companies will do in years to come.
Many people, particularly those who didn’t get online until this 
century had started, will have had their first direct experience of 
manipulating big data through Google. Although these days Google’s 
big data innovation goes well beyond basic search, it’s still their core 
business. They process 3.5 billion requests per day, and each request 
queries a database of 20 billion web pages.

--- PAGE 4 ---
big data - case study collection
3
This is refreshed daily, as Google’s bots crawl the web, copying down 
what they see and taking it back to be stored in Google’s index 
database. What pushed Google in front of other search engines has 
been its ability to analyse wider data sets for their search. 
Initially it was PageRank which included information about sites 
that linked to a particular site in the index, to help take a measure 
of that site’s importance in the grand scheme of things.  Previously 
leading search engines worked almost entirely on the principle of 
matching relevant keywords in the search query to sites containing 
those words. PageRank revolutionized search by incorporating other 
elements alongside keyword analysis. 
Their aim has always been to make as much of the world’s information 
available to as many people as possible (and get rich trying, of 
course…) and the way Google search works has been constantly 
revised and updated to keep up with this mission. 
Moving further away from keyword-based search and towards 
semantic search is the current aim. This involves analysing not just 
the “objects” (words) in the query, but the connection between them, 
to determine what it means as accurately as possible. 
To this end, Google throws a whole heap of other information 
into the mix. Starting in 2007 it launched Universal Search, 
which pulls in data from hundreds of sources including language 
databases, weather forecasts and historical data, financial data, travel 
information, currency exchange rates, sports statistics and a database 
of mathematical functions. 
It continued to evolve in 2012 into the Knowledge Graph, which 

--- PAGE 5 ---
big data - case study collection
4
displays information on the subject of the search from a wide range 
of resources directly into the search results.  
It then mixes what it knows about you from your previous search 
history (if you are signed in), which can include information about 
your location, as well as data from your Google+ profile and Gmail 
messages, to come up with its best guess at what you are looking for.
The ultimate aim is undoubtedly to build the kind of machine 
we have become used to seeing in science fiction for decades – a 
computer which you can have a conversation with in your native 
tongue, and which will answer you with precisely the information 
you want. 
Search is by no means all of what Google does, though. After all, 
it’s free, right? And Google is one of the most profitable businesses 
on the planet. That profit comes from what it gets in return for its 
searches – information about you. 
Google builds up vast amounts of data about the people using it. 
Essentially it then matches up companies with potential customers, 
through its Adsense algorithm. The companies pay handsomely 
for these introductions, which appear as adverts in the customers’ 
browsers. 
In 2010 it launched BigQuery, its commercial service for allowing 
companies to store and analyse big data sets on its cloud platforms. 
Companies pay for the storage space and computer time taken in 
running the queries. 
Another big data project Google is working on is the self-driving 
car. Using and generating massive amounts of data from sensors, 

--- PAGE 6 ---
big data - case study collection
5
cameras, tracking devices and coupling this with on-board and real-
time data analysis from Google Maps, Streetview and other sources 
allows the Google car to safely drive on the roads without any input 
from a human driver.
Perhaps the most astounding use Google have found for their 
enormous data though, is predicting the future. 
In 2008 the company published a paper in the science journal Nature 
claiming that their technology had the capability to detect outbreaks 
of flu with more accuracy than current medical techniques for 
detecting the spread of epidemics. 
The results were controversial – debate continues over the accuracy 
of the predictions. But the incident unveiled the possibility of “crowd 
prediction”, which in my opinion is likely to be a reality in the future 
as analytics becomes more sophisticated. 
Google may not quite yet be ready to predict the future – but its 
position as a main player and innovator in the big data space seems 
like a safe bet. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
6
2
GE
General Electric – a literal powerhouse of a corporation involved 
in virtually every area of industry, has been laying the foundations 
of what it grandly calls the Industrial Internet for some time now.
But what exactly is it? Here’s a basic overview of the ideas which they 
are hoping will transform industry, and how it’s all built around big 
data.
If you’ve heard about the Internet of Things which I’ve written about 
previously <click here>, a simple way to think of the industrial 
internet is as a subset of that, which includes all the data-gathering, 
communicating and analysis done in industry.
In essence, the idea is that all the separate machines and tools which 
make an industry possible will be “smart” – connected, data-enabled 
and constantly reporting their status to each other in ways as creative 
as their engineers and data scientists can devise. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
big data - case study collection
7
This will increase efficiency by allowing every aspect of an industrial 
operation to be monitored and tweaked for optimal performance, 
and reduce down-time – machinery will break down less often if we 
know exactly the best time to replace a worn part. 
Data is behind this transformation, specifically the new tools that 
technology is giving us to record and analyse every aspect of a 
machine’s operation. And GE is certainly not data poor – according 
to Wikipedia, its 2005 tax return extended across 24,000 pages when 
printed out. 
And pioneering is deeply engrained in its corporate culture – being 
established by Thomas Edison, as well as being the first private 
company in the world to own its own computer system, in the 1960s. 
So of all the industrial giants of the pre-online world, it isn’t surprising 
that they are blazing a trail into the brave new world of big data.
GE generates power at its plants which is used to drive the 
manufacturing that goes on in its factories, and its financial divisions 
enable the multi-million transactions involved when they are bought 
and sold. With fingers in this many pies, it’s clearly in the position to 
generate, analyse and act on a great deal of data. 
Sensors embedded in their power turbines, jet engines and hospital 
scanners will collect the data – it’s estimated that one typical gas 
turbine will generate 500Gb of data every day. And if that data can be 
used to improve efficiency by just 1% across five of their key sectors 
that they sell to, those sectors stand to make combined savings of 
$300 billion.
With those kinds of savings within sight, it isn’t surprising that GE 

--- PAGE 9 ---
big data - case study collection
8
is investing heavily. In 2012 they announced $1 billion was being 
invested over four years in their state-of-the-art analytics centre in 
San Ramon, California, in order to attract pioneering data talent to 
lay the software foundations of the Industrial Internet.
In aviation, they are aiming to improve fuel economy, maintenance 
costs, reduction in delays and cancellations and optimize flight 
scheduling – while also improving safety.
Abu Dhabi-based Etihad Airways was the first to deploy their Taleris 
Intelligent Operations technology, developed in partnership with 
Accenture. 
Huge amounts of data are recorded from every aircraft and every 
aspect of ground operations, which is reported in real-time and 
targeted specifically to recovering from disruption, and returning to 
regular schedule. 
And last year it launched its Hadoop <click here> based database 
system to allow its industrial customers to move its data to the cloud. 
It claims it has built the first infrastructure which is solid enough to 
meet the demands of big industry, and works with its GE Predictivity 
service to allow real-time automated analysis. This means machines 
can order new parts for themselves and expensive downtime 
minimized – GE estimates that its contractors lose an average of $8 
million per year due to unplanned downtime. 
Green industries are benefitting too – its 22,000 wind turbines across 
the globe are rigged with sensors which stream constant data to the 
cloud, which operators can use to remotely fine-tune the pitch, 
speed, and direction the blades are facing, to capture as much of the 
energy from the wind as possible.

--- PAGE 10 ---
big data - case study collection
9
Each turbine will speak to others around it, too – allowing automated 
responses such as adapting their behaviour to mimic more efficient 
neighbours, and pooling of resources (i.e wind speed monitors) if 
the device on one turbine should fail.
Their data gathering extends into homes too – millions are fitted 
with their smart meters which record data on power consumption, 
which is analysed together with weather and even social media data 
to predict when power cuts or shortages will occur. 
GE has come further and faster into the world of big data than most 
of its old-school tech competitors. It’s clear they believe the financial 
incentive is there – chairman and CEO Jeff Immelt estimates that 
they could add $10 trillion to $15 trillion to the world’s economy 
over the next two decades. In industry, where everything including 
resources is finite, efficiency is of utmost importance – and GE are 
demonstrating with the Industrial Internet that they believe big data 
is the key to unlocking its potential. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
10
3
Cornerstone
Employees are a both a business’s greatest asset and its greatest 
expense. So hitting on the right formula for selecting them, and 
keeping them in place, is absolutely essential. One company 
offering unique solutions to help others tackle this challenge 
is Cornerstone. I will give a brief overview of what they do, and 
why it’s an important – but controversial – example of big data 
analysis driving business growth. 
Cornerstone is a software tool which helps assess and understand 
employees and candidates by crunching half a billion data points on 
everything from gas prices, unemployment rates and social media 
use.
Clients such as Xerox use it to predict, for example, how long an 
employee is likely to stay in his or her job, and remarkable insights 
gleaned include the fact that in some careers, such as call centre 
work, employees with criminal records perform better than those 
without. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
big data - case study collection
11
Its prowess has made Cornerstone into a huge success, with sales 
growing by 150% from 2012 to 2013 and the software being put to 
use by 20 of the Fortune 100 companies. 
The “data points” are measurements taken from employees working 
across 18 industries in 13 different countries, providing information 
on everything from how long they take to travel to work, to how 
often they speak to their managers. Data collection methods include 
the controversial “smart badges” that monitor employee movements 
and track which employees interact with each other.
Cornerstone has certainly caused positive change in companies 
using it – Bank of America reportedly improved performance 
metrics by 23% and decreased stress levels (measured by analysing 
worker’s voices) by 19%, simply by allowing more staff to take their 
breaks together. 
And Xerox reduced call centre turnover by 20% by applying analytics 
to prospective candidates – finding among other things that creative 
people were more likely to remain with the company for the 6 
months necessary to recoup the $6,000 cost of their training than 
inquisitive people. 
So far data gathering and analysis has focused mainly on customer-
facing members of staff, who in larger organizations will tend to be 
those with less responsibility and decision-making power. Could 
even greater benefits be taken by applying the same principles to the 
movers and shakers in the boardroom, who hold the keys to wider-
reaching business change? Certainly some companies are starting to 
think that way. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
big data - case study collection
12
The director of research and strategy at one firm that uses the 
software – David Lathrop of Steelcase – told the Financial Times 
this year that improving the performance of top executives has 
a “disproportionate effect on the company”. Although he did not 
disclose precise details of methods or results, much research is being 
carried out in the name of finding exactly what it is that makes high-
fliers tick. This will inevitably find its way into analytical projects at 
big companies which spend millions hiring executives.  
Crunching employee data at this level plainly has the opportunity to 
bring huge benefits, but it could also prove disastrous if a company 
gets it wrong.
Failing to take proper consideration of individuals’ rights to privacy 
in some jurisdictions (eg Europe) can lead to severe legal penalties. 
In my opinion, any company thinking about carrying out data-
gathering and analysis for these purposes needs to take great care.
In workplaces where morale is low or relationships between workers 
and managers are not good, it could very easily be seen as a case of 
taking snooping too far.
Interestingly, Cornerstone’s privacy policy makes it clear that 
information on applicants is provided to them by their clients, 
including names, work history and contact details. How many people 
know that simply by applying for a job with one of these clients, their 
personal data will be made available for analysis? It appears that 
Cornerstone absolves itself of responsibility here by declaring itself a 
“mere data processor” – putting the onus on the client businesses to 
gain permission to distribute their applicants’ and employees’ data. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
big data - case study collection
13
It is vitally important that staff are made aware of precisely what data 
is being gathered from them, and what it is being used for. Everyone 
(and certainly those running the operation) needs to be aware that 
the purpose is to increase overall company efficiency, rather than 
assess or monitor individual members of staff.
With more than half of human resources departments reporting an 
increase in data analytics since 2010, according to a report by the 
Economist Intelligence Unit, it’s obvious that like it or not, it’s here 
to stay. Companies that use it well, with respect for their employees’ 
privacy and an understanding of the vital principle mentioned 
above, are likely to prosper. Those who don’t – be warned!

--- PAGE 15 ---
14
4
Microsoft
Since it was founded in 1975 by Bill Gates and Paul Allen, 
Microsoft has been a key player in just about every major 
advance in the use of computers, at home and in business. 
Just as it anticipated the rise of the personal computer, the graphical 
operating system and the internet, it wasn’t taken by surprise by the 
dawn of the big data era. It might not always be the principle source 
of innovation, but it has always excelled at bringing innovation to the 
masses, and packaging it into a user-friendly product (even though 
many would argue against this).  
It has caused controversy along the way, though, and at one time 
was called an “abusive monopoly” by the US Department of Justice, 
over its packaging of Internet Explorer with Windows operating 
systems. And in 2004 it was fined over $600m by the European 
Union following anti-trust action. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
big data - case study collection
15
The company’s fortunes have wavered in recent years – notably, they 
were slow to come up with a solid plan for capturing a significant 
share of the booming mobile market, causing them to lose ground 
(and brand recognition) to competitors Apple and Google. 
However it remains a market leader in business and home computer 
operating systems, office productivity software, web browsers, games 
consoles and search – Bing having overtaken Yahoo as the second 
most-used search engine. 
It is now angling to become a key player in big data, too – offering 
a suite of services and tools including data hosting and analytics 
services based on Hadoop to businesses.
But Microsoft had a substantial head-start over the competition – in 
fact their first forays into the world of big data started way before 
even the first version of MS-DOS. Gates and Allen’s first business 
venture, two years before Microsoft, a service providing real-
time reports for traffic engineers using data from roadside traffic 
counters. It’s clear that the founders of what would grow into the 
world’s biggest software company knew how important information 
(specifically, getting the right information to the right people, at the 
right time) would become in the digital age. 
Microsoft competed in the search engine wars from the beginning, 
rebranding its engine along the way from MSN Search, to Windows 
Live Search and Live Search before finally arriving at Bing in 2009. 
Although most of the changes it brought in appeared designed to ape 
the undisputed champion of search Google (such as incorporating 
various indexes, public records and relevant paid advertising into its 
results) there are differences. Bing places more importance on how 
well-shared information is on social networks when ranking it, as 
well as geographical locations associated with the data.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
big data - case study collection
16
Microsoft’s Kinect device for the Xbox aims to capture more data 
than ever from our own living rooms. It uses an array of sensors to 
capture minute movements and is already able to monitor and record 
the heart rate of users, as well as activity levels. Patent applications 
suggest there are plans for much wider use, including monitoring 
the behaviour of television viewers, to provide a more interactive 
watching experience. The move fits in with Microsoft’s strategy of 
rebranding the Xbox – generally thought of as a games console – 
into an intelligent living room activity hub which monitors, records 
and adapts to users’ behaviour. No, you are not the only person who 
finds that idea a little bit scary! 
In the business-to-business market, where Microsoft made its first 
fortunes with its OS and office software, it is now throwing all of its 
considerable weight into big data-related services for enterprise. 
Like Google with its Adwords, Bing Ads provides pay-per-click 
advertising services which are targeted at a precise audience segment, 
identified through data collected about our browsing habits.
And like competitors Google and Amazon it offers its own “big 
data in a box” solutions, combining open-source with proprietary 
software to offer large-scale data analytics operations to businesses 
of all sizes.
Its Analytics Platform System marries Hadoop with its industry-
standard SQL Server database management technology, while its 
ubiquitous Office 365 will soon make data analytics available to 
an even wider audience, with the inclusion of PowerBI – adding 
basic analytics functions to the world’s most widely used office 
productivity software. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
big data - case study collection
17
It is also looking to stake its claim on the Internet of Things with 
Azure Intelligent Systems Service. This is a cloud-based framework 
built to handle streaming information from the growing number of 
online-enabled industrial and domestic devices, from manufacturing 
machinery to bathroom scales. 
It may have missed a trick with mobile – prompting many premature 
declarations that Microsoft was falling behind the competition – but 
its keen embrace of data and analytics services show that it is still a 
key player. 
When CEO Satya Nadella took up his post at the start of this year he 
emailed all employees letting them know he expected huge change 
in the industry, and the wider world, very soon, prompted by “an 
ever-growing network of connected devices, incredible computing 
capacity from the cloud, insights from big data and intelligence from 
machine learning.”
So it’s clear that Microsoft aims to put big data at the heart of its 
business activities for the foreseeable future, and provide (relatively) 
simple software solutions to help the rest of us do the same. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
18
5
Kaggle
If you’re looking for a company which seems to embody all the 
principles of big data entrepreneurship under one roof, then 
look no further than Kaggle.
Crowd sourcing, predictive modelling, gamification – Kaggle has it 
all - and has worked out how to turn a profit from them.
The San Francisco-based business awards cash prizes to its teams of 
“citizen scientists” who compete to untangle big data challenges of 
all shapes and sizes.
And it isn’t just businesses which are benefitting – by applying 
the concept of crowd-sourcing to data analytics, they are helping 
to further scientific and medical research. Their projects include 
looking deep into the cosmos for traces of dark matter, and furthering 
research into HIV treatment. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
big data - case study collection
19
Chief scientist at Google (which has itself benefitted from Kaggle’s 
research) and Kaggle investor, Hal Varian, describes it as “a way to 
organize the brainpower of the world’s most talented data scientists 
and make it accessible to organizations of every size.”
And that’s certainly an intriguing aim – as well as a highly profitable 
one – in a world where businesses of all sizes are beginning to cotton 
on to the benefits of big data. Even if every company could afford to 
set up its own data analytics department, there aren’t nearly enough 
people trained to do the job to go around!
As with all emerging sciences, there is a shortage of trained data 
scientists at the moment – but Kaggle has 150,000 of them, ready to 
farm out to the highest bidder.
As well as charging companies they work with (including Amazon, 
Facebook, Microsoft and Wikipedia) up to $300 per hour for 
consultancy work, the company organizes competitions – which is 
where the gamification comes in.
I’ve written about gamification before – and Kaggle works along the 
same lines, with the theory being that it is easier to get people to 
take part in something if it is presented to them as a challenge or 
competition of some sort.
Current challenges include assisting with schizophrenia diagnosis 
by identifying the condition from MRA neuroimaging data, and 
finding the Higgs Boson amidst the mountains of data collected by 
CERN’s Atlas particle physics experiments. 
They are open to anybody to take part in, and all the information (as 
well as the necessary data sets can be found at Kaggle’s website.

--- PAGE 21 ---
big data - case study collection
20
Although it is frequently reported that they have “over 100,000 data 
scientists”, these are actually registered users and competitors rather 
than employees. There are no qualification or experience barriers to 
registering as a Kaggle data scientist, previous winners have ranged 
from data science academics and professionals to enthusiastic, 
knowledgeable amateurs. However certain competitions are 
occasionally reserved for “masters” – those who have shown they 
have the right stuff through their previous work with Kaggle. 
The company also recruit its own staff to work on internal projects. 
In fact they are advertising for recruits now – and although no 
requirements are listed, other than that applicants be “experienced”, 
two questions on the application form ask for the mean and standard 
deviation of two sets of numbers.
The concept is undoubtedly inspired by earlier pioneering work 
in crowd-sourcing data analysis, such as the Search For Extra-
terrestrial Intelligence at Home (SETI @home) project, and a 
competition organized by Netflix in 2009 offering £1 million to the 
person who came up with a better algorithm for providing movie 
recommendations. 
Kaggle has taken those idea and expanded on them, basically – it acts 
as the middle man, with companies or organizations bringing their 
problems, and Kaggle packaging them into competitions, gathering 
the contestants and sharing out the rewards.
The data itself is often simulated – and contestants are challenged to 
come up with methods or algorithms which are more efficient than 
existing methods at solving the problem in hand. Using simulated 
data means that issues surrounding access to sensitive data can be 

--- PAGE 22 ---
big data - case study collection
21
sidestepped. Once that is done, the reward – currently up to $30,000, 
although occasionally much larger for the top projects – is paid.
One of its best known success stories was the Heritage Health Prize, 
which awarded $3 million last year to the winning entrant, whose 
algorithm most accurately predicted which patients would be admitted 
to hospital in the coming 12 months, from a set of medical data. 
They also offer the Kaggle In Class service – an academic spin-off of 
the main brand which offers free data processing tools and simulated 
challenges. It is intended for use in schools and colleges struggling to 
meet the challenges of training the first generations of professional 
data scientists. 
Of course like anything new it isn’t without its critics. In particular, 
questions have been asked about how valuable the research it leads 
to actually is – often, they say, the biggest challenges in data analysis 
revolve around what data is needed, and what questions should be 
asked. Kaggle’s pre-packaged competitions take this element out of 
the equation. The crowdsourced data scientists might be working 
on the solution to a particular problem – but is it the correct one? 
And might there be more relevant data elsewhere, other than that 
supplied in the competition package?
This might be a fundamental limitation to the competition model, 
until data collection and distribution evolves to the point where it 
can be made available to contestants in real-time, and then of course 
there will be serious privacy and data protection issues to hurdle. 
But as it stands today, Kaggle is one of the more forward-thinking 
innovations in big data, and has done much to raise awareness of the 
power that crowd sourcing data analysis can bring to businesses and 
organizations of all sizes. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
22
6
Facebook
Facebook – it’s the world’s biggest social network by a huge 
margin, and most of us are used to using it to share details of 
our everyday lives with our friends and families. It’s no secret 
now that we’re also sharing it with their advertisers, but that 
hasn’t put most of us off using it! So here’s a brief rundown of 
how Facebook has been one of the most successful companies 
in the world at gathering our data and turning it into profit – 
and why some think its business practices sometimes overstep 
the mark.   
Recently, Facebook has been causing a stir amongst those interested 
in online privacy and data protection. The latest accusations are 
that is has been carrying out unethical psychological research – 
effectively experimenting on its users without their permission. 
Critics have said that by attempting to alter people’s moods by 
showing them specific posts with either a positive or negative vibe, 

--- PAGE 24 ---
big data - case study collection
23
and then measuring their response, several ethical guidelines have 
been broken.
The truth though, is that Facebook (and the internet at large) is 
making its own rules as it goes along. Putting 1.25 billion people – 
that’s getting on for one fifth of the world’s population, if we pretend 
for a second that none of the accounts are duplicates – within a 
mouse click of each other was always going to have far reaching 
consequences.  And with hindsight it was a bit silly to have ever 
expected it to be manageable within established social and legal 
boundaries.
Of course those of us who love social media believe the potential 
benefits far outweigh the hazards. Putting aside how much easier it 
makes keeping in touch with our friends and family, there’s clearly 
a lot to be learned from studying the data generated during that 
communication. And gathering data from us is the foundation of 
Facebook’s business model.
Don’t forget though - although it now seems to be dipping its toes 
into psychological experiments, Facebook’s main motivation for 
collecting and analysing our data has always been to sell us adverts. 
Advertisers benefit from highly detailed profiles users build up over 
time as they use the site – meaning their messages can be targeted 
precisely at “women over 40 who love books” or “men under 25 
living in the UK who love football”.
The huge and speedy success of Facebook was prompted by its 
simple interface and, somewhat ironically given how things have 
developed, emphasis on user privacy. This helped it quickly become 
more popular than other early social networks such as Myspace and 

--- PAGE 25 ---
big data - case study collection
24
Bebo. But with hindsight, it’s clear to see it was always gunning for 
bigger targets. 
A big difference between Google and Facebook is that Google’s 
information on who we are is often a “best guess” based on what 
sites we are visiting. From the start, Facebook explicitly asks us who 
we are, where we live and what we are interested in.  Yes, Google 
eventually started to do the same with Google+, but by then, they 
were simply playing catch-up. Advertisers clearly value this direct 
approach – ad revenues at Facebook grew by 129% from 2011 to 
2013, compared to 49% at Google during the same period. 
Like Google and all of the other big tech firms, buying up smaller 
firms to make use of their IP and, crucially, the data from their 
user base, is a core business strategy. Notable acquisitions have 
included Instagram and Whatsapp, both of which came with 
existing communities of millions of users to add to Facebook’s 
own. Interestingly, their highest profile recent purchase was the 
makers of the upcoming Oculus Rift virtual reality headset. They are 
clearly thinking ahead to a time when we may be looking for more 
convenient methods than existing screens offer to view our data. 
Facebook has always said that the privacy worries this causes 
are addressed by the fact that all information is shared with our 
permission and anonymized when sold on for marketing purposes. 
That hasn’t stopped a lot of critics taking issue with their practices 
though. For example, many say that the privacy settings are too 
complex or not clearly explained, meaning it is too easy for people 
to share things they didn’t mean to. Facebook have tried to fix this 
several times over the years – often confusing people who had got 
used to the way they were!

--- PAGE 26 ---
big data - case study collection
25
Another feature which caused concern when it was introduced 
was facial recognition. When you upload a picture, you might see 
suggestions for people you could tag on it. This is based on analysis 
of the picture data, which is compared against pictures of people 
in your Friends list, and prompted an investigation by EU privacy 
regulators in 2011. 
More recently, changes to the way its users’ habits are monitored 
have caused concerns. Its latest monitoring tools record everything 
from how long a user “hovers” their cursor over certain parts of the 
page to what websites they visit outside of Facebook. Last month it 
announced that this information is being used in their algorithms 
that determine which adverts to show us. 
But, at least it is now possible to delete your data permanently, if 
you don’t want Facebook to have access to it at all, any more. Before 
2010 you couldn’t even really delete your account – although you 
could remove your profile, everything was kept on their servers 
for an unspecified amount of time, for unspecified purposes (it 
would hardly be any use to target adverts at you, if you no longer 
had an account with which to view the site.) Outcry when this was 
discovered prompted Facebook to add the ability to erase yourself 
completely. 
Facebook’s data strategy is led by its Data Science team – who have 
their own page, of course, which you can see here. They regularly 
post updates on insights they have gleaned from analysing the habits 
of the millions who browse the site.  
Overall I think that a lot of the problems caused by Facebook are a 
symptom of its enormous success. Regulators and lawmakers have 
shown themselves to be slow to get to grips with the revolution it 

--- PAGE 27 ---
big data - case study collection
26
(and other social media) have brought to the way we communicate 
with each other, day to day. And, as with Google, it seems like there 
are more than enough people who think the problems are worth 
putting up with, for the convenience it brings. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
27
7 
Amazon
Amazon is a big data giant, which is why I want to look at 
the company in my second post of my series on how specific 
organizations use big data.
We all know that Amazon pioneered e-commerce in many ways, 
but possibly one of its greatest innovations was the personalized 
recommendation system – which, of course, is built on the big data 
it gathers from its millions of customer transactions.
Psychologists speak about the power of suggestion – put something 
that someone might like in front of them and they may well be 
overcome by a burning desire to buy it – regardless of whether or 
not it will fulfil any real need.
This is of course how impulse advertising has always worked – but 
instead of a scattergun approach, Amazon leveraged their customer 
data and honed its system into a high powered, laser-sighted sniper 

--- PAGE 29 ---
big data - case study collection
28
rifle. Or at least that is the plan – they don’t seem to get it completely 
right yet. I have had some very strange recommendations from 
Amazon.
Anyway, their systems are getting better and it looks like what we 
have seen so far is only the beginning – as I’ve previously mentioned, 
Amazon has recently obtained a patent on a system designed to 
ship goods to us before we have even decided to buy it – predictive 
despatch – you can read more about that  here. This is a strong 
indicator that their confidence in reliable predictive analytics is 
increasing.
An important factor to consider when looking at Amazon is how 
commercial its big data is, compared to those of other companies 
that deal with data on a comparable scale. Unlike, say, Facebook – 
which might know an awful lot about which movies you like or who 
your friends are – the vast majority of Amazon’s data on us relates to 
how we spend hard cash.
And having worked out how to use it to get more money out of 
our pockets, it is now setting out on a mission to help other global 
corporations do the same – by making that data, as well as its own 
tools for analysing it, available to buy.
This means that, as with Google, we have started to see adverts driven 
by Amazon’s platform and based on its data appearing on other sites 
over the past few years. As noted by MIT Technology Review last 
year, this makes the company now a head-on competitor to Google 
– with both online giants fighting for a chunk of marketers’ budgets.
However, ad sales is not the only arena in which Amazon is taking 
on Google – its Amazon Web Services offers cloud-based computing 

--- PAGE 30 ---
big data - case study collection
29
and big data analysis on an enterprise scale. This allows companies 
which need to run highly processor-intensive procedures to rent the 
computing time far more cheaply than setting up their own data 
processing centres – just like Google’s BigQuery.
These services include datawarehousing (Redshift), hosted Hadoop 
solution (Elastic Map Reduce), S3 – the database service it uses to 
run its own physical warehousing operations and Glacier, an archival 
service. Recently added to this list is Kinesis, which is a real-time 
“stream processing” service designed to aid analysis of high volume, 
real-time data streams.
Amazon has also incorporated big data analysis into its customer 
service operations. Its purchase of shoe retailer Zappos is often 
cited as a key element in this. Since its founding, Zappos had 
earned a fantastic reputation for its customer service and was often 
held up as a world leader in this respect. Much of this was due to 
their sophisticated relationship management systems which made 
extensive use of their own customer data. These procedures were 
melded together with Amazon’s own, following the 2009 acquisition.
Finally, it is worth mentioning the public data sets that Amazon 
hosts, and allows analysis of, through Amazon Web Services. Fancy 
digging around in the data unearthed through the Human Genome 
Project, NASA’s Earth science datasets or US census data? Amazon 
hosts all of this and much more, and makes it available for anyone 
to browse for free.
Amazon has grown far beyond its original inception as an online 
bookshop, and much of this is due to its enthusiastic adoption of big 
data principles. It looks set to continue breaking new ground in this 
field, for the foreseeable future.

--- PAGE 31 ---
big data - case study collection
30
Connect with Bernard
About the Author
Bernard Marr is a leading global authority 
and best-selling author on organizational 
performance and business success. He is a 
LinkedIn Influencer, he writes the Big Data 
Guru blog and is the world’s #1 expert on big 
data. He regularly advises leading companies, 
organizations and governments across the 
globe, and is an acclaimed and award-winning keynote speaker, 
researcher, consultant and teacher.
Bernard is the founder and CEO of the Advanced Performance 
Institute. Prior to this he held influential positions at the University 
of Cambridge and at Cranfield School of Management. Bernard 
Marr’s expert comments on organizational performance have been 
published in The Times, The Financial Times, The Sunday Times, 
Financial Management, the CFO Magazine and The Wall Street 
Journal.

--- PAGE 32 ---
big data - case study collection
31
GET SMART AND LEARN TO 
CONVERT THE PROMISE OF BIG 
DATA INTO REAL–WORLD RESULTS
There is so much buzz around big data. We all need to know what it is 
and how it works. But what will set you apart from the rest is actually 
knowing how to use big data to get solid, real-world business results 
and putting that in place to improve performance. 
If you like what you’ve read here get yourself a copy of Big Data: Using 
Smart Big Data, Analytics and Metrics to Make Better Decisions and Im-
prove Performance and learn how to devise your own big data strategy. 
• Understand why you need to clearly define what it is you 
need to know from your data
• Learn how you can collect relevant data and measure the 
metrics that will help you answer your most important 
business questions
• Find out how the results of big data analytics can be 
visualized and communicated to ensure key decisions-
makers understand them
BUY TODAY  
FROM YOUR  
FAVOURITE  
BOOKSTORE! 

