--- PAGE 1 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
1/17
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨
plotly
Mar 20 · 11 min read
Plotly Express is a new high-level Python visualization library: it’s a wrapper for
Plotly.py that exposes a simple syntax for complex charts. Inspired by Seaborn and
ggplot2, it was specifically designed to have a terse, consistent and easy-to-learn API:
with just a single import, you can make richly interactive plots in just a single function
call, including faceting, maps, animations, and trendlines. It comes with on-board
datasets, color scales and themes, and just like Plotly.py, Plotly Express is totally free:
with its permissive open-source MIT license, you can use it however you like (yes, even
in commercial products!). Best of all, Plotly Express is fully compatible with the rest of
Plotly ecosystem: use it in your Dash apps, export your figures to almost any file format
using Orca, or edit them in a GUI with the JupyterLab Chart Editor!
If you’re the TL;DR type, just pip install plotly_express and head on over to our
walkthrough notebook or gallery or reference documentation to start playing around,
otherwise read on for an overview of what makes Plotly Express special. If you have any
feedback or want to check out the code, it’s all up on Github.
Quick and easy data visualization with Plotly Express
The code used to generate the screenshots below is available in our walkthrough notebook
which you can load up on Binder to play with right now in your browser without installing
anything.
Once you import Plotly Express (usually as px ), most plots are made with just one
function call that accepts a tidy Pandas data frame, and a simple description of the plot
you want to make. If you want a basic scatter plot, it’s just px.scatter(data,
x="column_name", y="column_name") .
Here’s an example with the Gapminder dataset – which comes built-in! – showing life
expectancy vs GPD per capita by country for 2007:

--- PAGE 2 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
2/17
If you want to break that down by continent, you can color your points with the color
argument and px takes care of the details, assigning default colors, setting up the
legend etc:

--- PAGE 3 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
3/17
Each point here is a country, so maybe we want to scale the points by the country
population… no problem: there’s an arg for that too! Unsurprisingly, it’s called size:
Curious about which point is which country? Add a hover_name and you can easily
identify any point: never again wonder “what is that outlier?”... just mouse over the
point you're interested in! In fact, the whole plot is interactive, even without
hover_name :

--- PAGE 4 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
4/17
Here’s an embedded version of the plot above that you can interact with right here. Try
mousing over points, clicking or double-clicking on legend items, or using the
“modebar” that appears when you move your mouse into the frame to control the
behaviour click-drag interactions (zoom, pan, select):
Try mousing over points, clicking or double-clicking on legend items, or using the “modebar” that appears
when you move your mouse into the frame to control the behaviour click-drag interactions (zoom, pan,
select).
You can also facet your plots to pick apart the continents, just as easily as coloring your
points, with facet_col="continent" , and let's make the x-axis logarithmic to see things
more clearly while we’re at it:
0
10k
20k
30k
40k
50k
40
50
60
70
80
continent=Africa
continent=Americas
continent=Asia
continent=Europe
continent=Oceania
gdpPercap
lifeExp
EDIT CHART

--- PAGE 5 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
5/17
Maybe you’re interested in more than just 2007 and you want to see how this chart
evolved over time. You can animate it by setting animation_frame="year" (and
animation_group="country" to identify which circles match which ones across frames).
In this final version, let’s also tweak some of the display here, as text like “gdpPercap” is
kind of ugly even though it’s the name of our data frame column. We can provide
prettier labels that get applied throughout the figure, in legends, axis titles and
hovers. We can also provide some manual bounds so the animation looks nice
throughout:

--- PAGE 6 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
6/17
Because this is geographic data, we can also represent it as an animated map, which
makes it clear that px can make way more than just scatter plots, and that this dataset
is missing data for the former Soviet Union.
In fact, Plotly Express supports scatter and line plots in 3d, polar and ternary
coordinates, as well as in 2d coordinates and on maps. Bar plots are available in both
2d cartesian and polar flavours, and to visualize distributions, you can use histograms
and box or violin plots in univariate settings, or density contours for bivariate
distributions. Most 2d cartesian plots accept continuous or categorical data, and
automatically handles date/time data as well. Check out our gallery for examples of
each of these charts and the one-liners that made them!

--- PAGE 7 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
7/17
Visualize Distributions
A major part of data exploration is understanding the distribution of values in a
dataset, and how those distributions relate to each other. Plotly Express includes a
number of functions to do just that.
Visualize univariate distributions with histograms, box-and-whisker or violin plots:
Histograms with optional aggregation functions like ‘sum’ or ‘average’ in addition to just ‘count’

--- PAGE 8 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
8/17
Box and whisker plots, with optional notches.
Violin plots, with optional jittered points and embedded boxes.
You can also visualize bivariate distributions with marginal rugs, histograms, boxes or
violins, and you can add trendlines too. px even helpfully adds the line’s equation and
R² in the hover box for you! It uses statsmodels under the hood to do either Ordinary
Least Squares (OLS) regression or Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing (LOWESS).

--- PAGE 9 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
9/17
Trendlines and marginal distributions
Color scales and sequences
You’ll notice some nice color scales in some of the plots above. Plotly Express. The
px.colors module contains a number of useful scales and sequences: qualitative,
sequential, diverging, cyclical, and all your favourite open-source bundles:
ColorBrewer, cmocean and Carto. We’ve also included some functions to make
browsable swatches for your enjoyment (check them out at the bottom of the gallery):

--- PAGE 10 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
10/17
Qualitative color sequences
Just some of the many built-in sequential color scales
Interactive Multidimensional Visualization, in one line of
Python
We’re especially proud of our interactive multidimensional charts like scatterplot
matrices (SPLOMS), parallel coordinates, and a flavour of parallel sets we call parallel
categories. With these, you can visualize entire datasets in a single plot for data
exploration. Check out these one-liners and the interactions they enable, right in your
Jupyter notebook:

--- PAGE 11 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
11/17
Scatterplot matrices (SPLOMs) allow you to visualize multiple linked scatterplots: every variable in your
dataset vs ever other variable. Each row in your dataset appears as a point in each plot. Zoom, pan, select:
all the plots are linked!
Parallel coordinates allow you to visualize more than 3 continuous variables at once. Each row in your data
frame is a line. You can drag dimensions to reorder them and select intersections between ranges of
values.

--- PAGE 12 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
12/17
Parallel categories are a categorical analogue to parallel coordinates: use them to visualize the
relationship between multiple sets of categories in your dataset.
Part of the Plotly ecosystem
Plotly Express is to Plotly.py what Seaborn is to matplotlib: a high-level wrapper that
allows you to quickly create figures, and then use the power of the underlying API and
ecosystem to make modifications afterwards. In the case of the Plotly ecosystem, this
means that once you’ve created a figure with Plotly Express, you can use Themes,
imperatively edit it using FigureWidgets, export it to almost any file format using Orca,
or edit it in our GUI JupyterLab Chart Editor.
Themes allow you to control figure-wide settings like margins, fonts, background
colors, tick positioning and more. You can apply any named theme or theme object
using the template argument (see our Themes post for details on creating your own
themes and registering their names):

--- PAGE 13 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
13/17
Three built-in Plotly themes: plotly, plotly_white and plotly_dark
px outputs objects of the class ExpressFigure which inherits from Plotly.py’s Figure
meaning you can use any of Figure ’s accessors and methods to mutate a px -produced
plot. For example, you can chain a .update() call to a px call to change legend settings
and add an annotation. .update() now returns the modified figure so you can still do
this all in one long Python statement:
Here we use Plotly.py’s API to change some legend settings and add an annotation, after using Plotly
Express to generate the original fgure.
A perfect fit for Dash
Dash is Plotly’s open-source framework for building analytical apps and dashboards
featuring Plotly.py charts. The objects which px produces are 100% compatible with
Dash, just pass them straight into dash_core_components.Graph like this:
dcc.Graph(figure=px.scatter(…)) . Here’s an example of a very simple 50-line Dash app
that uses px to generate its figures:

--- PAGE 14 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
14/17
This 50-line Dash app uses Plotly Express to generate a UI to explore a dataset
Design Philosophy: why we built Plotly Express
There are many reasons to visualize data: sometimes you want to present some idea or
result and you want to exert a lot of control over every aspect of your chart, and
sometimes you want to quickly see the relationship between two variables. This is the
communication-vs-exploration spectrum.
Plotly.py has grown into a very powerful tool for the communication use-case: it lets
you control almost every aspect of a figure, from the placement of the legend to the
length of the tick-marks. The cost of this control, unfortunately, is verbosity: it can
sometimes take many lines of Python to produce figures with Plotly.py.
Our main goal with Plotly Express was to make it easier to use Plotly.py for exploration
and rapid iteration.
We wanted to build a library that made a different set of tradeoffs: sacrificing some
measure of control early in the visualization process in exchange for a less verbose API,
one that allows you to make a wide variety of figures in a single line of Python. As we
showed above, however, that control isn’t gone: you can still use the underlying
Plotly.py API to tweak and polish the figures made with Plotly Express.

--- PAGE 15 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
15/17
One of the main design decisions that enables such a terse API is that all px functions
accept a “tidy” data frame as input. Every Plotly Express function embodies a crisp
mapping of data frame rows to individual or grouped visual marks, and has a Grammar
of Graphics-inspired signature that lets you directly map these marks’ visual variables
like x- or y-position, color, size, facet-column or even animation-frame to columns in
your data frame. When you type px.scatter(data, x='col1', y='col2') , Plotly Express
creates a little symbol mark for each row in your data frame – that’s what px.scatter
does — and maps the values from the column called "col1" to the x-position of the
mark (and similarly for the y-position). The power of this approach is that it treats all
visual variables the same way: you can map a data frame column to color, then change
your mind and map it to size, or to a facet-row just as easily by changing the argument.
Accepting whole tidy data frames plus column names as input (as opposed to, say, raw
numpy vectors) also allows px to save you a lot of keystrokes because since it knows the
names of your columns, it can generate all the Plotly.py configuration to label your
legend entries, axes, hover boxes, facets and even animation frames. As mentioned
above, though, if your data frame columns are awkwardly-named, you can tell px to
substitute nicer ones with the labels argument to every function.
The final advantage conferred by accepting only tidy input is that it supports rapid
iteration more directly: you tidy your data set once, and from there on in you can create
dozens of different types of figures with px : visualize multiple dimensions in a SPLOM,
with parallel coordinates, on a map, in 2d, ternary polar or 3d coordinates, all without
reshaping your data!
We haven’t sacrificed all aspects of control in the name of expediency, we’ve just
focused on the types of control you want to exert in the exploration phase of a data
visualization process. You can use the category_orders argument to most functions to
tell px that your categorical data “good”, “better”, “best” has a non-alphabetic order
that matters, and it will be used in categorical axes, facet and legend orderings. You can
use the color_discrete_map (and other *_map args) to pin specific colors to specific
data values if that’s meaningful to your use-case. And of course, you can override the
color_discrete_sequence or color_continuous_scale (and other *_sequence args)
everywhere.
At the API level, we’ve put a lot of work into px to make sure all the arguments are
named so as to maximize discoverability as you type: all scatter -like functions start
with “ scatter ” (e.g. scatter_polar , scatter_ternary ) so you can discover them via

--- PAGE 16 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
16/17
auto-completion. We opted to split these different scatter functions up so each of them
would accept a tailored set of keyword arguments, particular to their coordinate
system. That said, sets of functions which share a coordinate system (e.g. scatter ,
line & bar , or scatter_polar , line_polar & bar_polar ) also have arguments which
behave identically, to maximize ease of learning. We’ve also put a lot of effort into
coming up with short and expressive names that map well onto the underlying
Plotly.py attributes, to ease the transition into communication-oriented figure tweaking
later in your workflow.
Finally, we should note: Plotly Express is ready for release today, but it’s not finished!
We want to extend faceting to all coordinate systems, add the ability to compose
various px -generated figures together, complete our coverage of Plotly.py trace-types
and more! Once we’re done, Plotly Express will get rolled in to Plotly.py version 4
(when it comes out this summer) as plotly.express , although it will remain available
as plotly_express as well, so don’t hesitate to start using it as a standalone library
today!
Getting Started
To use Plotly Express right now, just pip install plotly_express and head on over to
our documentation pages for some copy-paste-able examples. Feel free to star and
watch our Github repo to get notified of new releases. Speaking of the Github repo, if
you have feedback on this library, find a bug or just want some help, please open an
issue and we’ll try to help you out!
We’re really excited to see what scientists, analysts and engineers the world over create
with px so feel free to share your graphics with us on Twitter: we’re @plotlygraphs
Thanks
Thanks to the Plotly.js and Plotly.py teams for strong foundations to build upon, to
Nicolas Kruchten for leading this effort, and to Fernando Pérez for early motivation and
inspiration!
Data Visualization
About
Help
Legal

--- PAGE 17 ---
8/24/2019
✨ Introducing Plotly Express ✨ - Plotly - Medium
https://medium.com/plotly/introducing-plotly-express-808df010143d
17/17

