--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
Make Data Work
strataconf.com
Presented by O’Reilly and Cloudera, 
Strata + Hadoop World is where 
cutting-edge data science and new 
business fundamentals intersect—
and merge.
n Learn business applications of 
data technologies
n Develop new skills through 
trainings and in-depth tutorials
n Connect with an international 
community of thousands who 
work with data
Job # 15420

--- PAGE 3 ---
DJ Patil and Hilary Mason
Data Driven
Creating a Data Culture 

--- PAGE 4 ---
978-1-491-92119-7
[LSI]
Data Driven
by DJ Patil and Hilary Mason
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles ( http://safaribooksonline.com ). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com .
Editor: Timothy McGovern
Copyeditor: Rachel Monaghan
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
January 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-01-05: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Data Driven, the
cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their
products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book,
and O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been
printed in caps or initial caps.
While the publisher and the author(s) have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author(s) disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Table of Contents
Data Driven:
Creating a Data Culture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
What Is a Data Scientist?                                                                     2
What Is a Data-Driven Organization?                                              5
What Does a Data-Driven Organization Do Well?                         8
Tools, Tool Decisions, and Democratizing Data Access              19
Creating Culture Change                                                                  22
v

--- PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---
Data Driven:
Creating a Data Culture
The data movement is in full swing. There are conferences (Strata
+Hadoop World), bestselling books (Big Data, The Signal and the
Noise, Lean Analytics), business articles (“Data Scientist: The Sexiest
Job of the 21st Century”), and training courses (An Introduction to
Machine Learning with Web Data, the Insight Data Science Fellows
Program) on the value of data and how to be a data scientist.
Unfortunately, there is little that discusses how companies that suc‐
cessfully use data actually do that work. Using data effectively is not
just about which database you use or how many data scientists you
have on staff, but rather it’s a complex interplay between the data
you have, where it is stored and how people work with it, and what
problems are considered worth solving.
While most people focus on the technology, the best organizations
recognize that people are at the center of this complexity. In any
organization, the answers to questions such as who controls the
data, who they report to, and how they choose what to work on are
always more important than whether to use a database like Post‐
greSQL or Amazon Redshift or HDFS.
We want to see more organizations succeed with data. We believe
data will change the way that businesses interact with the world, and
we want more people to have access. To succeed with data, busi‐
nesses must develop a data culture. 
1

--- PAGE 8 ---
What Is a Data Scientist?
Culture starts with the people in your organization, and their roles
and responsibilities. And central to a data culture is the role of the
data scientist. The title data scientist has skyrocketed in popularity
over the past five years. Demand has been driven by the impact on
an organization of using data effectively. There are chief data scien‐
tists now in startups, in large companies, in nonprofits, and in gov‐
ernment. So what exactly is a data scientist?
A data scientist doesn’t do anything fundamentally new. We’ve long
had statisticians, analysts, and programmers. What’s new is the way
data scientists combine several different skills in a single profession.
The first of these skills is mathematics, primarily statistics and linear
algebra. Most scientific graduate programs provide sufficient mathe‐
matical background for a data scientist.
Second, data scientists need computing skills, including program‐
ming and infrastructure design. A data scientist who lacks the tools
to get data from a database into an analysis package and back out
again will become a second-class citizen in the technical organiza‐
tion.
Finally, a data scientist must be able to communicate. Data scientists
are valued for their ability to create narratives around their work.
They don’t live in an abstract, mathematical world; they understand
how to integrate the results into a larger story, and recognize that if
their results don’t lead to action, those results are meaningless.
2 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 9 ---
In addition to these skills, a data scientist must be able to ask the
right questions. That ability is harder to evaluate than any specific
skill, but it’s essential. Asking the right questions involves domain
knowledge and expertise, coupled with a keen ability to see the
problem, see the available data, and match up the two. It also
requires empathy, a concept that is neglected in most technical edu‐
cation programs.
The old Star Trek shows provide a great analogy for the role of the
data scientist. Captain Kirk is the CEO. Inevitably, there is a crisis
and the first person Kirk turns to is Spock, who is essentially his
chief data officer. Spock’s first words are always “curious” and “fasci‐
nating”—he’s always adding new data. Spock not only has the data,
but more importantly, he uses it to understand the situation and its
context. The combination of data and context allows him to use his
domain expertise to recommend solutions. This combination gives
the crew a unique competitive advantage.
Does your organization have its version of a Spock in the board‐
room? Or in another executive meeting? If the data scientists are
isolated in a group that has no real contact with the decision makers,
your organization’s leadership will suffer from a lack of context and
expertise. Major corporations and governments have realized that
What Is a Data Scientist? 
| 
3

--- PAGE 10 ---
they need a Spock on the bridge, and have created roles such as the
chief data scientist (CDS) and chief data officer (CDO) to ensure
that their leadership teams have data expertise. Examples include
Walmart, the New York Stock Exchange, the cities of Los Angeles
and New York, and even the US Department of Commerce and
National Institutes of Health.
Why have a CDO/CDS if the organization already has a chief tech‐
nology officer (CTO) or a chief information officer (CIO)? First, it is
important to establish the chief data officer as a distinct role; that’s
much more important than who should report to whom. Second, all
of these roles are rapidly evolving. Third, while these roles overlap,
the primary measures of success for the CTO, CIO, and CDS/CDO
are different. The CIO has a rapidly increasing set of IT responsibili‐
ties, from negotiating the “bring your own device” movement to
supporting new cloud technologies. Similarly, the CTO is tasked
with an increasing number of infrastructure-related technical
responsibilities. The CDS/CDO is responsible for ensuring that the
organization is data driven.
4 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 11 ---
What Is a Data-Driven Organization?
The most well-known data-driven organizations are consumer
Internet companies: Google, Amazon, Facebook, and LinkedIn.
However, being data driven isn’t limited to the Internet. Walmart has
pioneered the use of data since the 1970s. It was one of the first
organizations to build large data warehouses to manage inventory
across its business. This enabled it to become the first company to
have more than $1 billion in sales during its first 17 years. And the
innovation didn’t stop there. In the 1980s, Walmart realized that the
quality of its data was insufficient, so to acquire better data it
became the first company to use barcode scanners at the cash regis‐
ters. The company wanted to know what products were selling and
how the placement of those products in the store impacted sales. It
also needed to understand seasonal trends and how regional differ‐
ences impacted its customers. As the number of stores and the vol‐
ume of goods increased, the complexity of its inventory manage‐
ment increased. Thanks to its historical data, combined with a fast
predictive model, the company was able to manage its growth curve.
To further decrease the time for its data to turn into a decision, it
became the first large company to invest in RFID technologies.
More recently it’s put efforts behind cutting-edge data processing
technologies like Hadoop and Cassandra.
FedEx and UPS are well known for using data to compete. UPS’s
data led to the realization that, if its drivers took only right turns
(limiting left turns), it would see a large improvement in fuel savings
and safety, while reducing wasted time. The results were surprising:
UPS shaved an astonishing 20.4 million miles off routes in a single
year.
Similarly, General Electric uses data to create improve the efficiency
of its airline engines. Currently there are approximately 20,000 air‐
planes operating with 43,000 GE engines. Over the next 15 years,
30,000 more engines are expected to be in use. A 1% improvement
in efficiency would result in $30 billion in savings over the next 15
years. Part of its effort to attack these problems has been the new
GEnx engine. Each engine weighs 13,740 pounds, has 4,000 parts
with 18 fan blades spinning at 1,242 ft/sec, and has a discharge tem‐
perature of 1,325ºF. But one of the most radical departures from tra‐
ditional engines is the amount of data that is recorded in real time.
According to GE, a typical flight will generate a terabyte of data.
What Is a Data-Driven Organization? 
| 
5

--- PAGE 12 ---
This data is used by the pilots to make better decisions about effi‐
ciencies, and by the airlines to find optimal flight paths as well as to
anticipate potential issues and conduct preventative maintenance.
What about these data-driven organizations enables them to use
data to gain a competitive advantage? In Building Data Science
Teams, we said that a data-driven organization
acquires, processes, and leverages data in a timely fashion to create
efficiencies, iterate on and develop new products, and navigate the
competitive landscape..
Let’s break down the statement a little. The first steps in working
with data are acquiring and processing. But it’s not obvious what it
takes to do these regularly. The best data-driven organizations focus
relentlessly on keeping their data clean. The data must be organized,
well documented, consistently formatted, and error free. Cleaning
the data is often the most taxing part of data science, and is fre‐
quently 80% of the work. Setting up the process to clean data at scale
adds further complexity. Successful organizations invest heavily in
tooling, processes, and regular audits. They have developed a culture
that understands the importance of data quality; otherwise, as the
adage goes, garbage in, garbage out.
A surprising number of organizations invest heavily in processing
the data, with the hopes that people will simply start creating value
from it. This “if we build it, they will come” attitude rarely works.
The result is large operational and capital expenditures to create a
vault of data that rarely gets used. The best organizations put their
data to use. They use the data to understand their customers and the
nuances of their business. They develop experiments that allow
them to test hypotheses that improve their organization and pro‐
cesses. And they use the data to build new products. The next sec‐
tion explains how they do it.
Democratizing Data
The democratization of data is one of the most powerful ideas to
come out of data science. Everyone in an organization should have
access to as much data as legally possible.
While broad access to data has become more common in the scien‐
ces (for example, it is possible to access raw data from the National
Weather Service or the National Institutes for Health), Facebook was
one of the first companies to give its employees access to data at
6 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 13 ---
scale. Early on, Facebook realized that giving everyone access to data
was a good thing. Employees didn’t have to put in a request, wait for
prioritization, and receive data that might be out of date. This idea
was radical because the prevailing belief was that employees
wouldn’t know how to access the data, incorrect data would be used
to make poor business decisions, and technical costs would become
prohibitive. While there were certainly challenges, Facebook found
that the benefits far outweighed the costs; it became a more agile
company that could develop new products and respond to market
changes quickly. Access to data became a critical part of Facebook’s
success, and remains something it invests in aggressively.
All of the major web companies soon followed suit. Being able to
access data through SQL became a mandatory skill for those in busi‐
ness functions at organizations like Google and LinkedIn. And the
wave hasn’t stopped with consumer Internet companies. Nonprofits
are seeing real benefits from encouraging access to their data—so
much so that many are opening their data to the public. They have
realized that experts outside of the organization can make important
discoveries that might have been otherwise missed. For example, the
World Bank now makes its data open so that groups of volunteers
can come together to clean and interpret it. It’s gotten so much value
that it’s gone one step further and has a special site dedicated to pub‐
lic data.
Governments have also begun to recognize the value of democratiz‐
ing access to data, at both the local and national level. The UK gov‐
ernment has been a leader in open data efforts, and the US govern‐
ment created the Open Government Initiative to take advantage of
this movement. As the public and the government began to see the
value of making the data more open, governments began to catalog
their data, provide training on how to use the data, and publish data
in ways that are compatible with modern technologies. In New York
City, access to data led to new Moneyball-like approaches that were
more efficient, including finding “a five-fold return on the time of
building inspectors looking for illegal apartments” and “an increase
in the rate of detection for dangerous buildings that are highly likely
to result in firefighter injury or death.” International governments
have also followed suit to capitalize on the benefits of opening their
data.
One challenge of democratization is helping people find the right
data sets and ensuring that the data is clean. As we’ve said many
What Is a Data-Driven Organization? 
| 
7

--- PAGE 14 ---
times, 80% of a data scientist’s work is preparing the data, and users
without a background in data analysis won’t be prepared to do the
cleanup themselves. To help employees make the best use of data, a
new role has emerged: the data steward. The steward’s mandate is to
ensure consistency and quality of the data by investing in tooling
and processes that make the cost of working with data scale loga‐
rithmically while the data itself scales exponentially. 
 
What Does a Data-Driven Organization Do
Well? 
There’s almost nothing more exciting than getting access to a new
data set and imagining what it might tell you about the world! Data
scientists may have a methodical and precise process for approach‐
ing a new data set, but while they are clearly looking for specific
things in the data, they are also developing an intuition about the
reliability of the data set and how it can be used.
For example, one of New York’s public data sets includes the number
of people who cross the city’s bridges each day. Let’s take just the
data for the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge. You might imagine that this
would produce a very predictable pattern. People commute during
the week, and perhaps don’t on the weekends. And, in fact, we see
exactly that for the first few months of 2012. We can ask a few
straightforward questions. What’s the average number of commuters
per day? How many people commuted on the least busy day? On the
most busy day? But then something strange happens. There’s a
bunch of missing data. What’s going on?
8 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 15 ---
A bit of digging around those dates will show you that there’s no
conspiracy here: that data represents Hurricane Sandy, when the
bridges and tunnels were deliberately closed. It also explains the
spike that happens when the bridges reopened. You also see traffic
drop sharply for the blizzard of February 2013. The data set is as
simple as they come—it’s just one integer per day—and yet there’s a
fascinating story hiding here.
When data scientists initially dive into a data set, they are not just
assembling basic statistics, they’re also developing an intuition for
any flaws in the data and any unexpected things the data might be
able to explain. It’s not a matter of checking statistics off a list, but
rather of building a mental model of what data says about the world.
What Does a Data-Driven Organization Do Well?  
| 
9

--- PAGE 16 ---
The process is similar, though on a larger scale, for organizations
with a data culture. One of the most important distinctions between
organizations that are data driven and those that are not is how they
approach hypothesis formulation and problem solving. Data-driven
organizations all follow some variant of the scientific method, which
we call the data scientific method: 
1. Start with data.
2. Develop intuitions about the data and the questions it can answer.
3. Formulate your question.
4. Leverage your current data to better understand if it is the right
question to ask. If not, iterate until you have a testable hypothesis.
5. Create a framework where you can run tests/experiments.
6. Analyze the results to draw insights about the question.
In 2009, Twitter was faced with a challenge. There was tremendous
excitement about the service, but people were just not using it regu‐
larly: three out of four people would stop using it within two
months. To solve the engagement problem, Twitter started by asking
questions and looking at its current data. It found a number of sur‐
prising results. First, users who had used the service at least seven
times in their first month were over 90% likely to return in subse‐
quent months. For many organizations, identifying this magic num‐
ber would be more than sufficient. But Twitter continued to study
the data, and was well rewarded. Among users with high retention,
it found that once a user followed 30 or more people, that person
was almost certainly going to become a long-term user. The com‐
pany continued to dig, and found that the nature of the people fol‐
lowed was also essential. Two-thirds of the people who new users
followed were purely for content, but one-third had to follow the
new users back.
Armed with these facts, the Twitter team was able to discover a solu‐
tion that was counter to the conventional thinking about onboard‐
ing new users. Sites like Facebook and LinkedIn presented new users
with an “address book importer” that would crawl the user’s email
addresses. Next, a new user would see a page filled with suggestions
for “people you may know.” Any other pages that might add “fric‐
tion” to the user’s experience would cause a significant (20%+) num‐
ber of users to abandon the onboarding.
The analysis showed that Twitter needed to (a) teach new users what
a tweet was, (b) suggest accounts that had high-quality content seg‐
10 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 17 ---
mented by categories (e.g., NFL, NBA, news sites), and then (c) sug‐
gest other users who were highly likely to follow someone once they
knew that person was on Twitter. Implementing these ideas adds
friction to the onboarding process by teaching users about the tweet;
it also puts people a user is likely to interact with last. However, the
result wasn’t a decrease in new users, but instead a 30% increase in
people completing the experience and a 20% increase in long-term
engagement!
In hindsight, the process and results almost look magical. They’re
far from that; they represent dedicated adherence to the data scien‐
tific method. It took roughly 2.5 years to arrive at and test these
results—and the process is nowhere near complete. Regular tests are
ongoing to further improve what happens when new users arrive.
The data scientific method never stops.
Twitter isn’t the only place that employs the data scientific method.
Google is famous for testing hundreds of experiments a day to
improve its search functionality. LinkedIn and Facebook are con‐
stantly conducting experiments to learn how to improve the experi‐
ence of new users. Netflix is well known for testing and adjusting its
entire experience to reduce the probability that users will cancel
their subscriptions. It is using its data to make very costly invest‐
ments into the types of shows that need to be created to keep its
users engaged. The Obama campaign, in its record-breaking fund‐
raising effort, did over 500 A/B tests over 20 months, resulting in
increasing donation conversions by 49% and signup conversions by
a whopping 161%. 
Managing Research
Once you have a sense of the problems that you’d like to tackle, you
need to develop a robust process for managing research. Without a
process, it’s easy to spend too much time on unimportant problems,
and without a research-specific process, it’s easy to get drawn into
the engineering world where research is not a priority.
Here’s a set of questions that can be asked about every data science
problem. They provide a loose framework for managing a robust
portfolio of research efforts with both short- and long-term rewards.
For each research problem, we ask:
What Does a Data-Driven Organization Do Well?  
| 
11

--- PAGE 18 ---
What is the question we’re asking?
It’s important to state the question in language that everyone in
the company can understand. This is harder than you think it
will be! Most companies have teams with diverse backgrounds,
so it’s important to articulate clearly the question that you are
addressing so that everyone in the organization can imagine
why it might be relevant and useful.
How do we know when we’ve won?
Once you have defined the question, you need to define the
metrics by which you will evaluate your answer. In many cases,
these are quantitative metrics (e.g., cross-validation), but in
some cases the metric may be qualitative, or even a “looks good
to me.” Everyone on the team needs to be clear about what a
success will look like.
Assuming we solve this problem perfectly, what will we build first?
This question is designed to assess the solution’s potential to
impact your business. What capabilities will you have that you
don’t have now? Is this an important problem to solve right
now?
While you should always have a “first thing” in mind, we rec‐
ommend coming up with further questions that you’ll be able to
investigate once you have answered the first one. That way, you
can manage both short- and long-term value.
If everyone in the world uses this, what is the impact?
What’s the maximum potential impact of this work? If it’s not
inspiring, is it worth pursuing at all? It’s vital to make sure that
data science resources are invested in projects that will have a
significant impact on the business. There is no greater insult
than “You’ve created an elegant solution to an irrelevant prob‐
lem.”
What’s the most evil thing that can be done with this?
This question is a bit different! Don’t ask it if you work with
people who enjoy doing evil. Instead, save this one for groups
that are so lawful and good that they limit their thinking. By
asking the team to imagine what their impact could be if you
abandon all constraints, you allow for a conversation that will
help you identify opportunities that you would otherwise miss,
and refine good ideas into great ones. We don’t want to build
12 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 19 ---
“evil” products, but subversive thinking is a good way to get
outside the proverbial box.
One of the challenges with data is the power that it can unleash
for both good and bad, and data scientists may find themselves
making decisions that have ethical consequences. It is essential
to recognize that just because you can, doesn’t mean you should.
It’s important to get outside input. When uncertain, we turn to
well-regarded experts on privacy and legal matters (e.g., the
Electronic Frontier Foundation).
Designing the Organization 
In the last few years, a lot of attention has been focused on the celeb‐
rity data scientist. But data science isn’t about celebrities; it’s a team
sport. While a single person who has access to data and knows how
to use it can have a huge impact, relying on a single celebrity isn’t
scalable. A culture that is dependent on one individual is fragile and
won’t be sustainable. It’s more important to think about the compo‐
sition of the team and how it should be organized.
Should the data team be centralized or decentralized? Should it be
part of Engineering, a product group, or Finance, or should it be a
separate organization? These are all important questions, but don’t
focus on them at first. Instead, focus on whether you have the key
ingredients that will allow the team to be effective. Here are some of
the questions you should ask:
• What are the short-term and long-term goals for data?
• Who are the supporters and who are the opponents?
• Where are conflicts likely to arise?
• What systems are needed to make the data scientists successful?
• What are the costs and time horizons required to implement those
systems?
Ask these questions constantly. As the data culture emerges and
gains sophistication, periodic restructuring will be necessary.
LinkedIn’s early data efforts were split between data scientists sup‐
porting the CFO (dashboards and basic reporting) and data scien‐
tists building products. When I (DJ) joined LinkedIn we had a
debate about how we should structure the team. The conventional
options were to build a team under the CEO, under the CTO, or in
Engineering. We tried something different. We put the data team in
What Does a Data-Driven Organization Do Well?  
| 
13

--- PAGE 20 ---
the Product organization. First, we wanted this team to be able to
drive and implement change while ensuring ownership and
accountability. Second, we had a phenomenal Engineering team,
and we realized that we could bring the Product and Engineering
teams into better alignment through common DNA.
Over time, we realized that this model couldn’t support the speed at
which we were growing (from 200 to 2,000 employees in under four
years), so we decentralized the team. The unfortunate consequence
was that data scientists would end up isolated, supporting a specific
group. We tried many solutions, but eventually decided that a
decentralized organization worked only when there were at least
three data scientists supporting a given area.
All of these organizational changes took place as we implemented
new technologies, built out our data warehouse, and grew our data
operations. We constantly needed to rethink and reevaluate our
organizational structure to provide the best career growth and
impact. However, we always had one central tenet in mind: to grow
a massive company, every part of the organization must be data
driven. This means that the data would be fully democratized, and
everyone would be sufficiently data proficient. Naturally, we would
still need those with a specific skill set, but data would become an
intrinsic skill and asset for every team.
Process
While most organizations focus on corporate structure, they give
less attention to the processes and technology needed to build a
data-driven culture. The next three sections outline some of the
most essential processes and ways to evaluate technologies.
Figure 1-1. DILBERT © 2007 Scott Adams. Used By permission of
UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.
14 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 21 ---
Daily dashboard
Data-driven organizations look at their data every morning. Starting
every day with a review of the data isn’t just a priority, it’s a habitual
practice. The simplest way to review the data is by looking at dash‐
boards that describe key metrics. These dashboards might be imple‐
mented by a spreadsheet that is emailed, or by a business intelli‐
gence application accessed through the Web.  
There are two classic complaints around dashboards. The first is
that they don’t contain enough data; the second is that there is too
much data. How do you find the right balance? Here are some hints.
Data vomit
Don’t fall for the urge to add “just one more thing” to the dash‐
board. Adding more information at greater density creates data
vomit. Data vomit is bad and leads to frustration. The data
becomes intimidating and, as a result, is just ignored.
Time dependency
Put data on your dashboard only if you know what you will do
if something changes. For example, if there is a significant
change on an hourly dashboard, does someone’s pager go off?
Does the appropriate team know what to investigate? Similarly,
display the data in a form that allows action to be taken. If the
dashboard contains a pie graph, will you be able to tell if there is
a change? Instead of a single dashboard, create different dash‐
boards that reflect different time scales. For example, some
dashboards might be on an hourly scale, while others could be
on a quarterly scale. These simple measures prevent your dash‐
board from turning into data vomit.
Value
Manage your dashboards instead of letting them manage you.
Review them and ask whether they are still giving you value. If
not, change them. It’s surprising how often people consider
their dashboard “fixed” and unchangeable. It’s quite the oppo‐
site: the dashboard is a living entity that allows you to manage
your organization. As the organization’s data sophistication
increases, it’s likely that old ways of measuring the system will
become too simplistic. Hence, those older measures should be
replaced with newer ones.
What Does a Data-Driven Organization Do Well?  
| 
15

--- PAGE 22 ---
Visual
Make your data look nice. It’s surprising how ugly most dash‐
boards are. The font is too small or in a typeface that isn’t clearly
readable. If there is a line graph, it looks like it came from the
1980s. Sometimes dashboards are put in 3D, or have a color
palette with no real meaning. Turn the data you regularly look
at into something that you’d like to look at.
Fatigue
Finally, watch out for “alert/alarm fatigue.” We like to create
alerts when something changes. But if there are too many
alarms, you create alarm fatigue: the team becomes desensitized
to the alerts, because they’re occurring so often and they’re fre‐
quently meaningless. Review alarms and ask what actions are
taken once the alarm is activated. Similarly, review false posi‐
tives and false negatives to see if the alerting system can be
improved. Don’t be afraid to remove an alert or an alarm if it
isn’t serving a purpose. Some well-regarded teams carry pagers,
so they can share the pain of unnecessary alarms. There is noth‐
ing like successive wake-up calls at 3 a.m. to motivate change.
As a general rule of thumb, we like to ask four questions when‐
ever data is displayed (in a dashboard, a presentation, or in a
product):
• What do you want users to take away? In other words, what
information do you want the user to walk away with? Is it that
things are good or things are bad?
• What action should you take? When presenting a result, ask
what you want your audience to do. For example, if there is a
problem with sales, and the recipient is the CEO, you might
want the CEO to call the head of sales right away. You may not
be able to convey this in the dashboard, but you certainly can
discuss it in your data meetings.
• How do you want the viewer to feel? Most effective organiza‐
tions embrace putting emotion and narrative around the data.
If the goal is to make people feel excited, use green. If the feel‐
ing is neutral, use black or blue. If you want to express concern
or urgency, use yellow or red. Great data teams spend time and
energy ensuring the narrative provides adequate context, is
compelling, and is intellectually honest.
16 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 23 ---
• Finally, is the data display adding value regularly? If not, don’t
be afraid to “prune” it. Removing items that are no longer val‐
uable keeps the dashboard effective and actionable.
Metrics meetings
One of the biggest challenges an organization faces isn’t creating the
dashboard, it’s getting people to spend time studying it. Many teams
go to great lengths to create a dashboard, only to learn how rarely
people use it. We’ve seen many attempts to force people to look at
the dashboards, including automated delivery to mobile devices,
human-crafted email summaries, and print copies of the dashboards
left on the chairs of executives. Most of these techniques don’t work.
When we’ve used tracking codes to measure the open rates of these
emails and see who has viewed the dashboards, the numbers were
atrocious.
The model that I’ve found the best is inspired by Sustained Silent
Reading, or SSR (a popular school reading program in the United
States). Instead of assuming that people looked at the data on their
own, we spent the first part of the meeting looking at the data as a
group. During this time, people could ask questions that would help
them understand the data. Everyone would then write down notes,
circle interesting results, or otherwise annotate the findings. At the
end of the reading period, time was dedicated to a discussion of that
data.
I’ve seen dramatic results from this method. During the first few
meetings, the conversation is focused on basic questions, but those
are quickly replaced by deeper questions. The team begins to
develop a common language for talking about the data. Even the
sophistication of the data presented begins to change.
This process prevents data from being used as a weapon to push an
agenda. Rather than jumping straight into decision making, we start
with a conversation about the data. At the end of the conversation,
we can then ask if we have enough information to make a decision.
If the answer is yes, we can move forward. If it’s no, we can ask what
it will take to make an informed decision. Finally, we ask if there is
any reason to think that we should go against the data.
As a result, everyone becomes smarter. A discussion makes every‐
one more informed about the data and its different interpretations.
It also limits mistakes. This kind of forum provides a safe environ‐
What Does a Data-Driven Organization Do Well?  
| 
17

--- PAGE 24 ---
ment for basic questions that might otherwise seem dumb (such as
“what do the labels on the axis mean?”). Simple questions often
expose flaws in the way data was collected or counted. It’s better to
find the flaws before a decision has been made.
Second, the conversation disarms the data as a political weapon. All
too often, Team 1 shows data defending its argument, and Team 2
shows similar but conflicting data for its argument. Who is right?
Focusing the conversation on the data rather than the decision
makes it possible to talk openly about how data was collected, coun‐
ted, and presented. Both teams might be right, but their data may be
addressing different issues. In this way, assessment through discus‐
sion wins, not the best graph.
One word of caution: don’t follow the data blindly. Being data driven
doesn’t mean ignoring your gut instinct. This is what we call “letting
the data drive you off a cliff.” Do a web search for “GPS” and “cliff”
and you’ll find that a surprising number of people actually crash
their car when the GPS is giving them bad information. Think about
that for a second. The windshield is huge relative to the screen size
of the GPS. As a result, the data coming through to the driver is
massive relative to the information that is output by the voice or the
screen of the GPS. By likewise hyper-optimizing to a specific set of
metrics, you too can drive (your business) off a cliff. Sometimes it is
necessary to ignore the data. Imagine a company that is trying to
determine which market to enter next. There is stronger user adop‐
tion in Market A, but in Market B there is a new competitor. Let’s
suppose all the data says that the company should go after Market A.
It still might be better to go after Market B. Why? The data can’t cap‐
ture everything. And sometimes you have to trust your gut.
How can you prevent these kinds of catastrophic failures? First, reg‐
ularly ask “are we driving off a cliff?” By doing so, you create a cul‐
ture that challenges the status quo. When a person uses that phrase,
it signals that it’s safe to challenge the data. Everyone can step back
and take into account the broader landscape.
Standup and domain-specific review meetings
We’ve discussed a number of meetings that are needed as part of a
data-driven culture. But we all know that endless, dull meetings kill
creativity and independent thought. How do we get beyond that?
I’ve found that it works to borrow processes and structures from
companies that implement agile methods.
18 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 25 ---
The first of these is the standup meeting. These are short meetings
(often defined by the time that a person is willing to stand) that are
used to make sure everyone on the team is up-to-date on issues.
Questions or issues become action items that are addressed outside
of the standup meeting. At the next standup meeting, the action
items are reviewed to see if they have been resolved, and if not, to
determine when resolution is expected. If you’re literally standing
up, standup meetings should be no longer than 30 minutes. They’re
a great way to start the day and enhance communication.
It’s a misconception that standup meetings and other ideas from the
agile movement work only for high-tech Silicon Valley firms.
Standup meetings are used to monitor situations in the US Depart‐
ment of Defense. The National Weather Service has a daily meeting
where the weather forecasters gather (both in person and virtually)
to raise any issues. The key to success in all of these forums is to be
ruthlessly efficient during the meeting and to make sure issues
raised (action items) are acted upon.
It’s also important for the data team to hold product review, design
review, architecture review, and code review meetings. All of these
meetings are forums where domain-specific expertise can provide
constructive criticism, governance, and help. The key to making
these meetings work is to make sure participants feel safe to talk
about their work. During these meetings, definitions of metrics,
methodologies, and results should be presented before being
deployed to the broader organization.
 
 
Tools, Tool Decisions, and Democratizing Data
Access
Data scientists are always asked about their tools: What tools do you
use? How do I become an expert user of a particular tool? What’s the
fastest way to learn Hadoop?
The secret of great data science is that the tools are almost irrelevant.
An expert practitioner can do better work in the Bash shell environ‐
ment than a nonexpert can do in R. Learning how to understand the
problem, formulate an experiment and ask good questions, collect
Tools, Tool Decisions, and Democratizing Data Access 
| 
19

--- PAGE 26 ---
or retrieve data, calculate statistics or implement an algorithm, and
verify the accuracy of the result is much more important than mas‐
tering the tools.
However, there are a few attributes of tools that both are timeless
and enable stronger teamwork:
• The best tools are powerful. They aren’t visual dashboards that
offer a limited set of options, but Turing-complete programming
languages. Powerful tools allow for unconventional and powerful
analysis techniques.
• The best tools are easy to use and learn. While tools should be
powerful, it should be easy to understand how to apply them. With
programming languages, you want to see tutorials, books, and
strong communities.
• The best tools support teamwork. These tools should make it eas‐
ier to collaborate on analysis and to make data science work repro‐
ducible.
• The best tools are beloved by the community. A tool that’s popular
in a technical community will have many more resources support‐
ing it than a proprietary one. It’ll be easier to find people who
already use the tools your team uses, and it’ll give your employees
the ability to demonstrate your company’s expertise by participat‐
ing in that community.
We’ve stressed the democratization of data access. Democratization
doesn’t come without costs, and may require rethinking your orga‐
nization’s data practices and tools. Not that long ago, it was common
for organizations with a lot of data to build a “data warehouse.” To
create a data warehouse, you would build a very robust database that
assumed the data types wouldn’t change very much over time.
Access to the warehouse was restricted to those who were “sanc‐
tioned”; all others were required to go to them. This organizational
structure created a data bottleneck. The tools in the data warehouse
might have been powerful, but they weren’t easy to use, and cer‐
tainly didn’t support teamwork or a larger data community. If you
needed data, you had to go through the data bureaucracy, which
meant that you’d get your data a day (or days) later; if you wanted
data that didn’t fit into the warehouse’s predefined schema, you
might be out of luck. Rather than teaching people to fish, data
bureaucrats opted to create dashboards that had limited functional‐
ity outside of the key questions they were designed to answer.
20 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

--- PAGE 27 ---
Requiring users to go through a data bureaucracy to get access to
data is sure to halt democratization. Don’t force the users who need
data to go through channels; train them to get it themselves. One
challenge of this approach is the ability to support a large number of
users. Most data solutions are evaluated on speed—but when you’re
supporting large numbers of users, raw speed may not be relevant.
Almost anything will be faster than submitting a request through
data warehouse staff. We made this mistake early in the process of
building LinkedIn’s data solutions, and learned that the following
criteria are more relevant than pure speed: 
• How well will the solution scale with the number of concurrent
users?
• How does it scale with the volume of data?
• How does the price change as the number of users or the volume of
data grows?
• Does the system fail gracefully when something goes wrong?
• What happens when there is a catastrophic failure?
Price is important, but the real driver is the ability to support the
broadest possible set of users.
Consider what Facebook found when it first allowed everyone to
access the data. Simply providing access to data didn’t help people
make better decisions. People couldn’t find the data they needed,
and there remained a huge gap in technical proficiency. Meanwhile
its data was growing at an unprecedented rate. To scale more effi‐
ciently, Facebook invested aggressively in tooling. One of its first
investments was a new way to store, access, and interact with the
data. And with that the company realized that it would need a new
language that would be easier for a broader set of employees to use.  
While Hadoop, the underlying technology, showed great promise,
the primary language supported, Pig, was not friendly for analysts,
product managers, or anyone accustomed to languages like SQL.
Facebook decided to invest in Hive, a SQL-like language that would
be more optimal for Hadoop, and a unique tooling layer called
HiPal that would be the primary GUI for Hive. HiPal allowed any
user to see what others in the company were accessing. This unique
form of transparency allowed a new user to get up to speed quickly
by studying what other people on the team were requesting and
then building on it.
Tools, Tool Decisions, and Democratizing Data Access 
| 
21

--- PAGE 28 ---
As powerful as HiPal was, it still was insufficient at helping users
who were unfamiliar with coding or languages. As a result, the Face‐
book data team started a series of training classes. These classes
allowed the team to educate staff about HiPal and simultaneously
share best practices. Combined with training, HiPal jumpstarted the
data capabilities of Facebook’s teams and fostered a strong sense of
data culture. It lowered the cost of data access and created the
expectation that you needed data to support your business deci‐
sions. It was a major foundation for Facebook’s growth strategy and
international expansion.
Creating Culture Change
We want organizations to succeed with data. But succeeding with
data isn’t just a matter of putting some Hadoop in your machine
room, or hiring some physicists with crazy math skills. Succeeding
with data requires real cultural change. It requires learning how to
have a discussion about the data—how to hear what the data might
be saying rather than just enlisting it as a weapon in company poli‐
tics. It requires spreading data through your organization, not just
by adding a few data scientists (though they are critical to the pro‐
cess), but by enabling everyone in the organization to access the
data and see what they can learn.
As Peter Drucker stated in Management Challenges for the 21st Cen‐
tury, “Everybody has accepted by now that change is unavoidable.
But that still implies that change is like death and taxes—it should be
postponed as long as possible and no change would be vastly pref‐
erable. But in a period of upheaval, such as the one we are living in,
change is the norm.” Good data science gives organizations the tools
to anticipate and stay on the leading edge of change. Building a data
culture isn’t easy; it requires persistence and patience. You’re more
likely to succeed if you start with small projects and build on their
success than if you create a grandiose scheme. But however you
approach it, building a data culture is the key to success in the 21st
century. 
 
22 
| 
Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture

