--- PAGE 1 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 1 of 12 
 
What is OLAP (Online Analytical Processing): 
Cube, Operations & Types 
What is Online Analytical Processing? 
OLAP is a category of software that allows users to analyze information from 
multiple database systems at the same time. It is a technology that enables 
analysts to extract and view business data from different points of view. OLAP 
stands for Online Analytical Processing. 
Analysts frequently need to group, aggregate and join data. These operations in 
relational databases are resource intensive. With OLAP data can be pre-calculated 
and pre-aggregated, making analysis faster. 
OLAP databases are divided into one or more cubes. The cubes are designed in 
such a way that creating and viewing reports become easy. 
OLAP cube: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 2 of 12 
 
At the core of the OLAP, concept is an OLAP Cube. The OLAP cube is a data 
structure optimized for very quick data analysis. 
The OLAP Cube consists of numeric facts called measures which are categorized by 
dimensions. OLAP Cube is also called the hypercube. 
Usually, data operations and analysis are performed using the simple spreadsheet, 
where data values are arranged in row and column format. This is ideal for two-
dimensional data. However, OLAP contains multidimensional data, with data 
usually obtained from a different and unrelated source. Using a spreadsheet is not 
an optimal option. The cube can store and analyze multidimensional data in a 
logical and orderly manner. 
How does it work? 
A Data warehouse would extract information from multiple data sources and 
formats like text files, excel sheet, multimedia files, etc. 
The extracted data is cleaned and transformed. Data is loaded into an OLAP server 
(or OLAP cube) where information is pre-calculated in advance for further analysis. 
Basic analytical operations of OLAP 
Four types of analytical operations in OLAP are: 
1. Roll-up 
2. Drill-down 
3. Slice and dice 
4. Pivot (rotate) 
1) Roll-up: 
Roll-up is also known as "consolidation" or "aggregation." The Roll-up operation 
can be performed in 2 ways 
1. Reducing dimensions 
2. Climbing up concept hierarchy. Concept hierarchy is a system of grouping 
things based on their order or level. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 3 of 12 
 
Consider the following diagram 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• In this example, cities New jersey and Lost Angles and rolled up into country 
USA 
• The sales figure of New Jersey and Los Angeles are 440 and 1560 
respectively. They become 2000 after roll-up 
• In this aggregation process, data is location hierarchy moves up from city to 
the country. 
• In the roll-up process at least one or more dimensions need to be removed. 
In this example, Quater dimension is removed. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
2) Drill-down 
In drill-down data is fragmented into smaller parts. It is the opposite of the rollup 
process. It can be done via 
• Moving down the concept hierarchy 
• Increasing a dimension 
Consider the diagram above 
• Quater Q1 is drilled down to months January, February, and March. 
Corresponding sales are also registers. 
• In this example, dimension months are added. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 6 of 12 
 
3) Slice: 
Here, one dimension is selected, and a new sub-cube is created. 
Following diagram explain how slice operation performed: 
 
• Dimension Time is Sliced with Q1 as the filter. 
• A new cube is created altogether. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 7 of 12 
 
Dice: 
This operation is similar to a slice. The difference in dice is you select 2 or more 
dimensions that result in the creation of a sub-cube. 
 
4) Pivot 
In Pivot, you rotate the data axes to provide a substitute presentation of data. 
In the following example, the pivot is based on item types. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 8 of 12 
 
Types of OLAP systems 
OLAP Hierarchical Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 9 of 12 
 
Type of OLAP 
Explanation 
Relational OLAP(ROLAP): 
ROLAP is an extended RDBMS along with 
multidimensional data mapping to perform the 
standard relational operation. 
Multidimensional OLAP 
(MOLAP) 
MOLAP Implements operation in 
multidimensional data. 
Hybrid Online Analytical 
Processing (HOLAP) 
In HOLAP approach the aggregated totals are 
stored in a multidimensional database while 
the detailed data is stored in the relational 
database. This offers both data efficiency of the 
ROLAP model and the performance of the 
MOLAP model. 
Desktop OLAP (DOLAP) 
In Desktop OLAP, a user downloads a part of the 
data from the database locally, or on their 
desktop and analyze it. 
 
DOLAP is relatively cheaper to deploy as it 
offers very few functionalities compares to 
other OLAP systems. 
Web OLAP (WOLAP) 
Web OLAP which is OLAP system accessible via 
the web browser. WOLAP is a three-tiered 
architecture. It consists of three components: 
client, middleware, and a database server. 
Mobile OLAP: 
Mobile OLAP helps users to access and analyze 
OLAP data using their mobile devices 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 10 of 12 
 
Spatial OLAP : 
SOLAP is created to facilitate management of 
both spatial and non-spatial data in a 
Geographic Information system (GIS) 
ROLAP 
ROLAP works with data that exist in a relational database. Facts and dimension 
tables are stored as relational tables. It also allows multidimensional analysis of 
data and is the fastest growing OLAP. 
Advantages of ROLAP model: 
• High data efficiency. It offers high data efficiency because query 
performance and access language are optimized particularly for the 
multidimensional data analysis. 
• Scalability. This type of OLAP system offers scalability for managing large 
volumes of data, and even when the data is steadily increasing. 
Drawbacks of ROLAP model: 
• Demand for higher resources: ROLAP needs high utilization of manpower, 
software, and hardware resources. 
• Aggregately data limitations. ROLAP tools use SQL for all calculation of 
aggregate data. However, there are no set limits to the for handling 
computations. 
• Slow query performance. Query performance in this model is slow when 
compared with MOLAP 
MOLAP 
MOLAP uses array-based multidimensional storage engines to display 
multidimensional views of data. Basically, they use an OLAP cube. 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 11 of 12 
 
Hybrid OLAP 
Hybrid OLAP is a mixture of both ROLAP and MOLAP. It offers fast computation of 
MOLAP and higher scalability of ROLAP. HOLAP uses two databases. 
1. Aggregated or computed data is stored in a multidimensional OLAP cube 
2. Detailed information is stored in a relational database. 
Benefits of Hybrid OLAP: 
• This kind of OLAP helps to economize the disk space, and it also remains 
compact which helps to avoid issues related to access speed and 
convenience. 
• Hybrid HOLAP's uses cube technology which allows faster performance for 
all types of data. 
• ROLAP are instantly updated and HOLAP users have access to this real-time 
instantly updated data. MOLAP brings cleaning and conversion of data 
thereby improving data relevance. This brings best of both worlds. 
Drawbacks of Hybrid OLAP: 
• Greater complexity level: The major drawback in HOLAP systems is that it 
supports both ROLAP and MOLAP tools and applications. Thus, it is very 
complicated. 
• Potential overlaps: There are higher chances of overlapping especially into 
their functionalities. 
Advantages of OLAP 
• OLAP is a platform for all type of business includes planning, budgeting, 
reporting, and analysis. 
• Information and calculations are consistent in an OLAP cube. This is a crucial 
benefit. 
• Quickly create and analyze "What if" scenarios 
• Easily search OLAP database for broad or specific terms. 
• OLAP provides the building blocks for business modeling tools, Data mining 
tools, performance reporting tools. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 12 of 12 
 
• Allows users to do slice and dice cube data all by various dimensions, 
measures, and filters. 
• It is good for analyzing time series. 
• Finding some clusters and outliers is easy with OLAP. 
• It is a powerful visualization online analytical process system which provides 
faster response times 
Disadvantages of OLAP 
• OLAP requires organizing data into a star or snowflake schema. These 
schemas are complicated to implement and administer 
• You cannot have large number of dimensions in a single OLAP cube 
• Transactional data cannot be accessed with OLAP system. 
• Any modification in an OLAP cube needs a full update of the cube. This is a 
time-consuming process 
Summary: 
• OLAP is a technology that enables analysts to extract and view business data 
from different points of view. 
• At the core of the OLAP, the concept is an OLAP Cube. 
• Various business applications and other data operations require the use of 
OLAP Cube. 
• There are primary five types of analytical operations in OLAP 1) Roll-up 2) 
Drill-down 3) Slice 4) Dice and 5) Pivot 
• Three types of widely used OLAP systems are MOLAP, ROLAP, and Hybrid 
OLAP. 
• Desktop OLAP, Web OLAP, and Mobile OLAP are some other types of OLAP 
systems. 
 

