--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---

--- PAGE 3 ---
Nidhi Aggarwal, Byron Berk,
Gideon Goldin, Matt Holzapfel,
and Eliot Knudsen
Getting Analytics Right
Answering Business Questions
with More Data in Less Time
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

--- PAGE 4 ---
978-1-491-95671-7
[LSI]
Getting Analytics Right
by Nidhi Aggarwal, Byron Berk, Gideon Goldin, Matt Holzapfel, and Eliot Knudsen
Copyright © 2016 Tamr, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Shannon Cutt
Interior Designer: David Futato
March 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-03-16: First Release
2016-04-15: Second Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Getting Analytics
Right and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  v
1. Visualize Data Analytics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Introduction                                                                                         1
Defining Visual Analytics                                                                   2
Role of Data Visualization                                                                  4
Role of Interaction                                                                               5
Role of Collaboration                                                                          7
Putting It All Together                                                                        8
References                                                                                             9
2. Choosing Your Own Adventure in Analytics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
Don’t Wait Until the End of the Book to Adjust Your Course    14
Adjust Quickly After Making Bad Decisions                                14
Iterate to Improve Performance                                                      15
As the Story Progresses, the Data Driving Your Decisions
Will Change                                                                                    16
A Book with a Changing Story Gets Read Multiple Times         17
3. Realizing ROI in Analytics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
The Lifecycle for a Feedback System                                              20
The Measurements for a Feedback System                                    20
The Database for a Feedback System                                              22
The ROI of a Feedback System                                                        23
4. Procurement Analytics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
Defining Analytics for Procurement                                              25
iii

--- PAGE 6 ---
Starting with Analytics                                                                      26
Analytics Use Case 1                                                                          26
Analytics Use Case 2                                                                          28
Analytics Use Case 3                                                                          29
Analytics Use Case 4                                                                          30
iv 
| 
Table of Contents

--- PAGE 7 ---
Introduction
Nidhi Aggarwal
“Getting Analytics Right” is, admittedly, a big promise in the big
data era. But given all of the opportunity and value at stake, how can
we aspire to anything less? Getting analytics right is especially
important considering the kinds of simple-to-ask yet difficult-to-
answer questions that linger within today’s enterprises. On the one
hand, there are customer data questions like: “Which customer seg‐
ments have the highest loyalty rates?” or “Which of my sales prospects
is most likely to convert to a customer?” On the other hand are sourc‐
ing questions like: “Are we getting the best possible price and terms for
everything we buy?” and “What’s our total spend for each supplier
across all business units?”
With the kind of internal and external data now available to enter‐
prises, these questions seem eminently answerable through a pro‐
cess as simple and logical as:
1. Ask the question
2. Define the analytic
3. Locate, organize, and analyze the data
4. Answer the question
5. Repeat
Except that the process rarely goes that way.
In fact, a recent Forbes Insight/Teradata survey of 316 large global
company executives found that 47% “do not think that their compa‐
nies’ big data and analytics capabilities are above par or best of
breed.” Given that “90% of organizations report medium to high lev‐
v

--- PAGE 8 ---
els of investment in big data analytics,” the executives’ self-criticism
begs the question: why, with so many urgent questions to answer
with analytics every day, are so many companies still falling short of
becoming truly data-driven?
In this chapter, we’ll explore the gap between the potential for big
data analytics in enterprise, and where it falls short, and uncover
some of the related problems and solutions.
Analytics Projects Often Start
in the Wrong Place
Many analytics projects often start with a look at some primary data
sources and an inference about what kinds of insights they can pro‐
vide. In other words, they take the available sources as a constraint,
and then go from there. As an example, let’s take the sourcing price
and terms question mentioned earlier: “Are we getting the best possi‐
ble price and terms for everything we buy?” A procurement analyst
may only have easy access to audited data at the “head” of the tail—
e.g., from the enterprise’s largest suppliers. The problem is, price/
variance may in fact be driven by smaller suppliers in the long tail.
Running a spend analytics project like this skips a crucial step. Anal‐
ysis must start with the business questions you’re trying to answer
and then move into the data. Leading with your data necessarily lim‐
its the number and type of problems you can solve to the data you
perceive to be available. Stepping back and leading with your ques‐
tions, however, in this question first approach liberates you from
such constraints, allowing your imagination to run wild about what
you could learn about customers, vendors, employees, and so on.
Analytics Projects End Too Soon
Through software, services, or a combination of both—most analyt‐
ics projects can arrive at answers to the questions your team is ask‐
ing. The procurement analyst may indeed be able to gather and
cobble together enough long-tail data to optimize spend in one cate‐
gory, but a successful analytics project shouldn’t stop with the deliv‐
ery of its specific answers. A successful analytics project should
build a framework for answering repeated questions—in this case,
spend optimization across all categories. For all the software and
services money they’re spending, businesses should expect every
vi 
| 
Introduction

--- PAGE 9 ---
analytics project to arm them with the knowledge and infrastructure
to ask, analyze, and answer future questions with more efficiency
and independence.
Analytics Projects Take Too Long…and Still
Fall Short
Despite improved methods and technologies, many analytics
projects still get gummed up in complex data preparation, cleaning,
and integration efforts. Conventional industry wisdom holds that
80% of analytics time is spent on preparing the data, and only 20% is
actually spent analyzing data. In the big data era, wisdom’s hold feels
tighter than ever. Massive reserves of enterprise data are scattered
across variable formats and hundreds of disparate silos. Consider, in
our spend analysis example, the many hundreds or thousands of
supplier sources that could be scattered throughout a multinational
manufacturing conglomerate. Then imagine integrating this infor‐
mation for analysis through manual methods—and the kind of
preparation delays standing between you and the answer to your
optimization questions.
Worse than delays, preparation problems can significantly diminish
the quality and accuracy of the answers, with incomplete data risk‐
ing incorrect insights and decisions. Faced with a long, arduous
integration process, analysts may be compelled to take what they can
(e.g., audited spend data from the largest suppliers)—leaving the rest
for another day, and leaving the questions without the benefit of the
full variety of relevant data.
Human-Machine Analytics Solutions
So what can businesses do when they are awash in data and have the
tools to analyze it, but are continuously frustrated by incomplete,
late, or useless answers to critical business questions?
We can create human-machine analytics solutions designed specifi‐
cally to get businesses more and better answers, faster, and continu‐
ously. Fortunately, a range of analytics solutions are emerging to
give businesses some real options. These solutions should feature:
1. Speed/Quantity—Get more answers faster, by spending less
time preparing data and more time analyzing it.
Introduction 
| 
vii

--- PAGE 10 ---
2. Quality—Get better answers to questions, by finding and using
more relevant data in analysis—not just what’s most obvious or
familiar.
3. Repeatability—Answer questions continuously, by leaving cus‐
tomers with a reusable analytic infrastructure.
Data preparation platforms from the likes of Informatica, OpenRe‐
fine, and Tamr have evolved over the last few years, becoming faster,
nimbler, and more lightweight than traditional ETL and MDM solu‐
tions. These automated platforms help businesses embrace—not
avoid—data variety, by quickly pulling data from many more sour‐
ces than was historically possible. As a result, businesses get faster
and better answers to their questions, since so much valuable infor‐
mation resides in “long-tail” data. To ensure both speed and quality
of preparation and analysis, we need solutions that pair machine-
driven platforms for discovering, organizing, and unifying long-tail
data with the advice of business domain and data science experts.
Cataloging software like Enigma, Socrata, and Tamr can identify
much more of the data relevant for analysis. The success of my rec‐
ommended question first approach of course depends on whether
you can actually find the data you need for determining answers to
your questions. That’s a formidable challenge for enterprises in the
big data era, as IDC estimates that 90% of big data is “dark data”—
data that has been processed and stored but is hard to find and
rarely used for analytics. This is an enormous opportunity for tech
companies to build software that quickly and easily locates and
inventories all data that exists in the enterprise, and is relevant for
analysis—regardless of type, platform, or source.
Finally, we need to build persistent and reusable data engineering
infrastructures that allow businesses to answer questions continu‐
ously, even as new data sources are added, and as data changes. A
business can do everything right—from starting with the question,
to identifying and unifying all available data, to reaching a strong,
analytically-fueled answer—and it can still fall short of optimizing
its data and analytic investment if it hasn’t built an infrastructure
that enables repeatable analytics, preventing the user from having to
start from scratch.
viii 
| 
Introduction

--- PAGE 11 ---
Question-First, Data-Second Approach
With the help of a question-first, data-second approach, fueled by
cataloging and preparation software, businesses can create a “virtu‐
ous analytics cycle” that produces more and better answers faster
and continuously (Figure P-1).
Figure P-1. The question-first, data-second approach (image credit:
Jason Bailey)
In the question-first, data-second approach, users:
• Ask the question to be answered and identify the analytics
needed to answer it, e.g.,
— Question: Am I getting the best price for every widget I buy?
— Analytic: Total spend for each widget supplier across all busi‐
ness units (BUs)
• Find all relevant data available to answer the question
— Catalog data for thousands of widget suppliers across dozens
of internal divisions/BUs.
— Enrich with external sources like Dun & Bradstreet.
• Organize the data for analysis, with speed and accuracy
Introduction 
| 
ix

--- PAGE 12 ---
— Use data preparation software to automate deduplication
across all suppliers and unify schema.
• Analyze the organized data through a combination of automa‐
tion and expert guidance
— Run the unified data through a tool like Tableau—in this case
a visual analysis that identifies opportunities to bundle
widget spend across BUs.
— Identify suppliers for negotiation and negotiate potential sav‐
ings.
• Answer questions continuously, through infrastructures that
are reusable—even as the data changes
— Run the same analytics for other widget categories–or even
the same category as the data and sources change.
As the Forbes/Teradata survey on “The State Of Big Data Analytics”
implies, collectively—businesses and analytics providers have a sub‐
stantial gap to close between being “analytics-invested” and “data-
driven.” Following a question-first, data-second approach can help
us close this gap.
x 
| 
Introduction

--- PAGE 13 ---
CHAPTER 1
Visualize Data Analytics
Gideon Goldin
Introduction
Let’s begin by imagining that you are an auto manufacturer, and you
want to be sure you are getting a good deal when it comes to buying
the parts you need to build your cars. Doing this means you need to
run some analyses over the data you have about spend with your
suppliers; this data includes invoices, receipts, contracts, individual
transactions, industry reports, etc. You may learn, for example, that
you are purchasing the same steel from multiple suppliers, one of
which happens to be both the least expensive and the most reliable.
With this newfound knowledge, you engage in some negotiations
around your supply chain, saving a substantial amount of money.
As appealing as this vignette might sound in theory, practitioners
may be skeptical. How do you discover and explore, let alone unify,
an array of heterogeneous datasets? How do you solicit dozens or
hundreds of experts’ opinions to clean your data and inform your
algorithms? How do you visualize patterns that may change quarter-
to-quarter, or even second-to-second? How do you foster communi‐
cation and transparency around siloed research initiatives?
Traditional data management systems, social processes, and the user
interfaces that abstract them become less useful as you collect more
and more data [21], while latent opportunity may grow exponen‐
tially. Organizations need better ways to reason about such data.
Many of these problems have motivated the field of Visual Analytics
(VA)—the science of analytical reasoning facilitated by interactive
1

--- PAGE 14 ---
1 The date’s attacks required real-time response at an unprecedented scale.
visual interfaces [1]. The objective of this chapter is to provide a
brief review of VA’s underpinnings, including data management &
analysis, visualization, and interaction, before highlighting the ways
in which a data-centric organization might approach visual analytics
—holistically and collaboratively.
Defining Visual Analytics
Where humans reason slowly and effortfully, computers are quick;
where computers lack intuition and creativity, humans are produc‐
tive. Though this dichotomy is oversimplified, the details therein
inspire the core of VA. Visual analytics employs a combination of
technologies, some human, some human-made, to enable more
powerful computation. As Keim et al. explain in Mastering the infor‐
mation age-solving problems with visual analytics, VA integrates “the
best of both sides.” Visual analytics integrates scientific disciplines to
optimize the division of cognitive labor between human and
machine [7].
The need for visual analytics is not entirely new; a decade has now
passed since the U.S. solicited leaders from academia, industry, and
government to set an initial agenda for the field. This effort, spon‐
sored by the Department of Homeland Security and led by the
newly chartered National Visualization and Analytics Center, was
motivated in part by a growing need to better utilize the enormous
and enormously disparate stores of data that governments had been
amassing for so long [1]. While the focus of this agenda was
post-9/11 security,1 similar organizations (like the European Vis‐
Master CA) share many of its goals [3]. Today, applications for VA
abound, spanning beyond national security to quantified self [5],
digital art [2], and of course, business intelligence.
Keim et al. go on to expand on Thomas and Cook’s definition from
Illuminating the path: The research and development agenda for visual
analytics [1]—citing several goals in the process:
• Synthesize information and derive insight from massive,
dynamic, ambiguous, and often conflicting data
• Detect the expected and discover the unexpected
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Visualize Data Analytics

--- PAGE 15 ---
• Provide timely, defensible, and understandable assessments
• Communicate assessment effectively for action
These are broad goals that eventuate a particularly multidisciplinary
approach; the following are just some of the fields involved in the
scope of visual analytics [11]:
• Information analytics
• Geospatial analytics
• Scientific & statistical analytics
• Knowledge discovery
• Data management & knowledge representation
• Presentation, production & dissemination
• Cognitive & perceptual science
• Interaction
Role of Data Management and Analysis
While traditional database research has focused on homogeneous,
structured data, today’s research looks to solve problems like unifi‐
cation across disparate, heterogeneous sources (e.g., streaming sen‐
sors, HTML, log files, relational databases, etc.) [7].
Returning to our auto manufacturing example, this means our anal‐
yses need to integrate across a diverse set of sources—an effort that,
as Michael Stonebraker [38] notes in Getting Data Right, is necessar‐
ily involved—requiring that we ingest the data, clean errors, trans‐
form attributes, match schemas, and remove duplicates.
Even with a small number of sources, doing this manually is slow,
expensive, and prone to error. To scale, one must make use of statis‐
tics and machine learning to do as much of the work as possible,
while keeping humans in the loop only for guidance (e.g., helping to
align cryptic coding schemas). Managing and analyzing these kinds
of data cannot be done in isolation; the task is multifaceted and
often requires collaboration and visualization; meanwhile, visualiza‐
tion requires curated or prepared data. Ultimately, we need interac‐
tive systems with interfaces that support seamless data integration,
enrichment, and cleaning [22].
Defining Visual Analytics 
| 
3

--- PAGE 16 ---
2 Only a few decades ago, visualization was unrecognized as a mainstream academic dis‐
cipline. John Tukey (inventor of the FFT algorithm, box plot, and more) played a key
part in its broader adoption, highlighting its role in data analysis.
Role of Data Visualization
Before elucidating the visual component of VA, it is helpful to define
visualization. In information technology, visualization usually refers
to something like that defined by Card et al. in Readings in informa‐
tion visualization: “the use of computer-supported, interactive visual
representations of data to amplify cognition” [24].
Visualization is powerful because it fuels the human sense with the
highest bandwidth: vision (300 Mb/s [28]). Roughly 20 billion of
our brain’s neurons are devoted to visual analysis, more than any
other sense [28], and cognitive science commonly refers to vision as
a foundational representation in the human mind. Because of this,
visualization is bound to play a critical role in any data-heavy con‐
text—in fact, the proliferation of data is what helped to popularize
visualization.2
Today, data visualization (DataVis) serves two major categories of
data: scientific measurements and abstract information.
Scientific Visualization
Scientific Visualization (SciVis) is typically concerned with the
representation of physical phenomena, often 3D geometries or
fields that span space and time [7]. The purpose of these visuali‐
zations is often exploratory in nature, ranging across a wide
variety of topics—whether investigating the complex relation‐
ships in a rat brain or a supernova [27].
Information Visualization
Information Visualization (InfoVis), on the other hand, is useful
when no explicit spatial references are provided [28]. These are
often the bar graphs and scatter plots on the screens of visual
analysts in finance, healthcare, media, etc. These diagrams offer
numerous benefits, one of which is taking advantage of visual
pattern recognition to aid in model finding during exploratory
data analysis.
Many of the most successful corporations have been quick to adopt
database technologies. As datasets grow larger faster, the corpora‐
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Visualize Data Analytics

--- PAGE 17 ---
3 During this time, several academic visualization projects set the groundwork for new
visualization techniques and tools. One example is Stanford’s Polaris [31];, an extension
of pivot tables that enabled interactive, visual exploration of large databases. In 2003,
the project was spun into the commercially available Tableau software. A comparison
of commercial systems is provided in [12].
tions that have augmented their database management systems with
information visualization have been better-enabled to utilize their
increasingly valuable assets.3 It can be said that VA does for data
analysis what InfoVis did for databases [7].
While InfoVis may lay the foundation for VA, its scope falls far out‐
side this book. Worth noting, however, is the challenge of visualizing
“big data.” Many of today’s visualizations are born of multidimen‐
sional datasets (with hundreds or thousands of variables with differ‐
ent scales of measurement), where traditional or static, out-of-the-
box diagrams do not suffice [7]. Research here constitutes a
relatively new field that is constantly extending existing visualiza‐
tions (e.g., parallel coordinates [30], treemaps [29], etc.), inventing
new ones, and devising methods for interactive querying over
improved visual summaries [19]. The bigger the data, the greater the
need for DataVis; the tougher the analytics, the greater the need for
VA.
Role of Interaction
Visual analytics is informed by technical achievements not just in
data management, analysis, and visualization, but also in interface
design. If VA is to unlock the opportunity behind information over‐
load, then thoughtful interaction is key.
In addition to the DataVis vs. SciVis distinction, there is sometimes
a line drawn between exploratory and explanatory (or expository)
visualization, though it grows more blurred with time. Traditionally,
exploratory DataVis is done by people that rely on vision to perform
hypothesis generation and confirmation, while explanatory DataVis
comprises summaries over such analyses. Though both exercises are
conducted by individuals, only the latter has a fundamentally social
component—it generates an artifact to be shared.
VA is intimately tied with exploratory visualization, as it must facili‐
tate reasoning (which is greatly enhanced by interaction). Causal
reasoning, for example, describes how we predict effects from causes
Role of Interaction 
| 
5

--- PAGE 18 ---
(e.g., forecasting a burst from a financial bubble) or how we infer
causes from effects (e.g., diagnosing an epidemic from shared symp‐
tomologies). By interacting, or intervening, we are able to observe
not just the passive world, but also the consequences of our actions.
If I observe the grass to be wet, I may raise my subjective probability
that it has rained. As Pearl [33] notes, though, observing that the
grass is wet after I turn on the sprinklers would not allow me to
draw the same inference.
The same is true in software; instead of manipulating the world, we
manipulate a simulation before changing data, models, views, or our
minds. In the visual analytics process, data from heterogeneous and
disparate sources must somehow be integrated before we can begin
visual and automated analysis methods [3].
The same big data challenges of InfoVis apply to interaction. The
volume of modern data tends to actually discourage interaction,
because users are not likely to wait more than a few seconds for a
filter query to extract relevant evidence (and such delays can change
usage even if users are unaware [23]). As Nielson [34] noted in 1993,
major guidelines regarding response times have not changed for
thirty years—one such guideline is the notion that “0.1 second is
about the limit for having the user feel that the system is reacting
instantaneously, meaning that no special feedback is necessary
except to display the result.” After this, the user will exchange the
feeling of directly manipulating [35] the data for one of delegating
jobs to the system. As these are psychological principles, they
remain unlikely to change any time soon.
Wherever we draw the line for what qualifies as a large dataset, it’s
safe to assume that datasets often become large in visualization
before they become large in management or analysis. For this rea‐
son, Peter Huber, in “Massive datasets workshop: Four years after”
wrote: “the art is to reduce size before one visualizes. The contradic‐
tion (and challenge) is that we may need to visualize first in order to
find out how to reduce size” [36]. To try and help guide us, Ben
Shneiderman, in “The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations” proposed the Visual Information Seeking
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Visualize Data Analytics

--- PAGE 19 ---
4 Keim emphasizes VA in his modification: “Analyze first, show the important, zoom, fil‐
ter and analyze further, details on demand” [7].
5 Tamr, for example, emphasizes collaboration within a VA framework, using machine
learning to automate tedious tasks while keeping human experts in the loop for guid‐
ance.
Mantra, which says: “Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-
on-demand” [37].4
Role of Collaboration
Within a business, the exploratory visualization an analyst uses is
often the same as the visualization she will present to stakeholders.
Explanatory visualizations, on the other hand, such as those seen in
infographics, are often reserved for marketing materials. In both
cases, visualization helps people communicate, not just because
graphics can be appealing, but because there is seldom a more effi‐
cient representation of the information (according to Larkin and
Simon, this is “Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand
words” [25]). Despite the communicative power underpinning both
exploratory and explanatory visualizations, the collaboration in each
is confined to activities before and after the production of the visu‐
alization. A more capable solution should allow teams of people to
conduct visual analyses together, regardless of spatiotemporal con‐
straints, since modern analytical challenges are far beyond the scope
of any single person.
Large and multiscreen environments, like those supported by Jigsaw
[14], can help. But in the past decade, an ever-growing need has
motivated people to look beyond the office for collaborators—in
particular, many of us have turned to the crowd. A traditional view
of VA poses the computer as an aid to the human; however, the
reverse can sometimes ring more true. When computer scientist Jim
Gray went missing at sea, top scientists worked to point satellites
over his presumed area. They then posted photos to Amazon’s
crowdsourcing service, Mechanical Turk, in order to distribute vis‐
ual processing across more humans. A number of companies have
since come to appreciate the power of such collaboration,5 while a
number of academic projects, such as CommentSpace [39] and
IBM’s pioneering ManyEyes [41], have demonstrated the benefits of
asynchronous commenting, tagging, and linking within a VA envi‐
Role of Collaboration 
| 
7

--- PAGE 20 ---
ronment. This is not surprising, as sensemaking is supported by
work parallelization, communication, and social organization [40].
Putting It All Together
Today’s most challenging VA applications require a combination of
technologies: high-performance computing and database applica‐
tions (which sometimes including cloud services for data storage
and management) and powerful interactions so analysts can tackle
large (e.g., even exabyte) scale datasets [10]—but issues remain.
While datasets grow, and while computing resources become more
inexpensive, cognitive abilities remain constant. Because of this, it is
anticipated that they will bottleneck VA without substantial innova‐
tion. For example, systems need to be more thoughtful about how
they represent evidence and uncertainty.
Next-generation systems will need to do more. As stated by Kristi
Morton in “Support the data enthusiast: Challenges for next-
generation data-analysis systems”[22], VA must improve in terms of:
1. combining data visualization and cleaning
2. data enrichment
3. seamless data integration
4. a common formalism
For combining data visualization and cleaning, systems can repre‐
sent suggestions around what data is not clean, and what cleaning
others may have done. If my software informs me of a suspiciously
inexpensive unit-price for steel sheets, I should be able to report the
data or fix it without concern of invalidating other analysts’ work.
For data enrichment, systems must know what dimensions to ana‐
lyze so that they can find and suggest relevant, external datasets,
which then must be prepared for incorporation. This kind of effort
can help analysts find correlations that may otherwise go undiscov‐
ered. If I am considering an investment with a particular supplier,
for example, I would likely benefit from a risk report released by a
third-party vendor or website.
In seamless data integration, systems should take note of the context
of the VA, so they can better pull in related data at the right time; for
example, zooming-in on a sub-category of transactions can trigger
8 
| 
Chapter 1: Visualize Data Analytics

--- PAGE 21 ---
the system to query data about competing or similar categories,
nudging me to contemplate my options.
Finally, a common formalism implies a common semantics—one
that enables data analysts and enthusiasts alike to visually interact
with, clean, and augment underlying data.
Next-generation analytics will require next-generation data manage‐
ment, visualization, interaction design, and collaboration. We take a
pragmatic stance in recommending that organizations build a VA
infrastructure that will integrate with existing research efforts to
solve interdisciplinary projects—this is possible at almost any size.
Furthermore, grounding the structure with a real-world problem
can facilitate rapid invention and evaluation, which can prove
invaluable. Moving forward, organizations should be better-
equipped to take advantage of the data they already maintain to
make better decisions.
References
[1] Cook, Kristin A., and James J. Thomas. Illuminating the path:
The research and development agenda for visual analytics. No.
PNNL-SA-45230. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL),
Richland, WA (US), 2005.
[2] Viégas, Fernanda B., and Martin Wattenberg. “Artistic data visu‐
alization: Beyond visual analytics.” Online Communities and Social
Computing. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007. 182-191.
[3] Keim, Daniel A., et al., eds. Mastering the information age-
solving problems with visual analytics. Florian Mansmann, 2010.
[5] Huang, Dandan, et al. “Personal visualization and personal vis‐
ual analytics.” Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transac‐
tions on 21.3 (2015): 420-433.
[7] Keim, Daniel, et al. Visual analytics: Definition, process, and
challenges. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
[10] Wong, Pak Chung, et al. “The top 10 challenges in extreme-
scale visual analytics.” IEEE computer graphics and applications 32.4
(2012): 63.
References 
| 
9

--- PAGE 22 ---
[11] Keim, Daniel, et al. “Challenges in visual data analysis.” Infor‐
mation Visualization, 2006. IV 2006. Tenth International Confer‐
ence on. IEEE, 2006.
[12] Zhang, Leishi, et al. “Visual analytics for the big data era—A
comparative review of state-of-the-art commercial systems.” Visual
Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), 2012 IEEE Conference
on. IEEE, 2012.
[14] Stasko, John, Carsten Görg, and Zhicheng Liu. “Jigsaw: sup‐
porting investigative analysis through interactive visualization.”
Information visualization7.2 (2008): 118-132.
[15] Fekete, Jean-Daniel, et al. “The value of information visualiza‐
tion.” Information visualization. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
1-18.
[19] Liu, Zhicheng, Biye Jiang, and Jeffrey Heer. “imMens: Real‐time
Visual Querying of Big Data.” Computer Graphics Forum. Vol. 32.
No. 3pt4. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2013.
[21] Stonebraker, Michael, Sam Madden, and Pradeep Dubey. “Intel
big data science and technology center vision and execution plan.”
ACM SIGMOD Record 42.1 (2013): 44-49.
[22] Morton, Kristi, et al. “Support the data enthusiast: Challenges
for next-generation data-analysis systems.” Proceedings of the
VLDB Endowment7.6 (2014): 453-456.
[23] Liu, Zhicheng, and Jeffrey Heer. “The effects of interactive
latency on exploratory visual analysis."Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 20.12 (2014): 2122-2131.
[24] Card, Stuart K., Jock D. Mackinlay, and Ben Shneiderman.
Readings in information visualization: using vision to think. Mor‐
gan Kaufmann, 1999.
[25] Larkin, Jill H., and Herbert A. Simon. “Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words.” Cognitive science 11.1
(1987): 65-100.
[27] Ma, Kwan-Liu, et al. “Scientific discovery through advanced
visualization.” Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 16. No. 1.
IOP Publishing, 2005.
[28] Ware, Colin. Information visualization: perception for design.
Elsevier, 2012.
10 
| 
Chapter 1: Visualize Data Analytics

--- PAGE 23 ---
[29] Shneiderman, Ben. “Tree visualization with tree-maps: 2-d
space-filling approach.” ACM Transactions on graphics (TOG) 11.1
(1992): 92-99.
[30] Inselberg, Alfred, and Bernard Dimsdale. “Parallel coordinates:
A tool for visualizing multivariate relations.” Human-Machine Inter‐
active Systems(1991): 199-233.
[31] Stolte, Chris, Diane Tang, and Pat Hanrahan. “Polaris: A system
for query, analysis, and visualization of multidimensional relational
databases.” Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transac‐
tions on 8.1 (2002): 52-65.
[32] Unwin, Antony, Martin Theus, and Heike Hofmann.Graphics
of large datasets: visualizing a million. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2006.
[33] Pearl, Judea. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
[34] Nielsen, Jakob. Usability engineering. Elsevier, 1994.
[35] Shneiderman, Ben. “Direct manipulation: A step beyond pro‐
gramming languages.” ACM SIGSOC Bulletin. Vol. 13. No. 2-3.
ACM, 1981.
[36] Huber, Peter J. “Massive datasets workshop: Four years after.”
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 8.3 (1999):
635-652.
[37] Shneiderman, Ben. “The eyes have it: A task by data type taxon‐
omy for information visualizations."Visual Languages, 1996. Pro‐
ceedings., IEEE Symposium on. IEEE, 1996.
[38] Stonebraker, Michael. “The Solution: Data Curation at Scale.”
Getting Data Right: Tackling the Challenges of Big Data Volume and
Variety. Ed. Shannon Cutt. California, 2015. 5-12. Print.
[39] Willett, Wesley, et al. “CommentSpace: structured support for
collaborative visual analysis."Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2011.
[40] Heer, Jeffrey, and Maneesh Agrawala. “Design considerations
for collaborative visual analytics."Information visualization 7.1
(2008): 49-62.
References 
| 
11

--- PAGE 24 ---
[41] Viegas, Fernanda B., et al. “Manyeyes: a site for visualization at
internet scale.” Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Trans‐
actions on 13.6 (2007): 1121-1128.
12 
| 
Chapter 1: Visualize Data Analytics

--- PAGE 25 ---
CHAPTER 2
Choosing Your Own
Adventure in Analytics
Byron Berk
This book is different from other books.
You and YOU ALONE are in charge of what happens in this story.
There are dangers, choices, adventures, and consequences. YOU
must use all of your numerous talents and much of your enormous
intelligence. The wrong decision could end in disaster—even death.
But, don’t despair. At anytime, YOU can go back and make another
choice, alter the path of your story, and change its result.
—Excerpt from The Abominable Snowman, 
by R.A. Montgomery
The quote above is from the first page of The Abominable Snowman,
a “Choose Your Own Adventure” book written by R.A. Montgom‐
ery. For the uninitiated, after reading a few pages of one of these
books, you are confronted with a new dilemma and offered an
opportunity to make a decision. With your decision made, you then
turn to a new page corresponding to your decision, with an adjusted
plot line and consequence. After reading a few more pages of the
story, you are prompted for another decision. Continue to read,
make decisions, and turn to the corresponding page until you reach
a unique conclusion to your reading of the book.
Next to my Rubik’s Cube, “Choose Your Own Adventure” books
remain among my fondest memories of my 3rd grade class in 1980.
My classmates and I loved the flexibility of the books and the con‐
trol our decisions exerted over the stories. Just think of the extra
13

--- PAGE 26 ---
reading mileage these books got, with thousands of kids each read‐
ing a book multiple times to explore the impact of their decisions
made throughout the story.
So what does “Choose Your Own Adventure” have to do with analyt‐
ics? Quite a bit, actually, as these books are a metaphor for how ana‐
lytics should be approached in the business world.
Don’t Wait Until the End of the Book to Adjust
Your Course
“Choose Your Own Adventure” plot lines were never set before you
opened the cover and turned to the first page. Rather, with each
unfolding event, there was a new opportunity to ask new questions,
to gather additional data, to learn from mistakes, and to adjust. Sto‐
ries were dynamic, and the decisions you made along the way influ‐
enced the outcome. In fact, you couldn’t simply read the book from
cover to cover and let the story unfold. You had to make decisions at
appropriate times and change the course of the story.
Similarly, analytics need to guide your business awareness and
directly influence decisions on a regular basis. We use analytics
specifically to build a stronger understanding of our business. We
gather leading indicators (like new contacts and marketing qualified
leads from tradeshows), lagging indicators (like company bookings
in the last quarter), and coincident indicators (like our current pay‐
roll and “burn” rate). If we hope to stay in business for a long time,
we’ll be sure to regularly leverage data to improve our competitive
stance in the marketplace. We can’t wait until the final score is tal‐
lied; instead, we must continuously collect data, analyze, and act
upon the information to improve performance.
Adjust Quickly After Making Bad Decisions
In a “Choose Your Own Adventure,” I’d use a finger to keep the place
in the book where I made my last decision based on the information
available. If the decision somehow ended in disaster, there was no
need to start the book over from the beginning; instead, I’d just
return to the point of the last decision and make a new decision.
Perhaps this was cheating, but I preferred to view it as learning
quickly from mistakes. The effects of the decisions were instantly
14 
| 
Chapter 2: Choosing Your Own Adventure in Analytics

--- PAGE 27 ---
evident, creating an opportunity to avoid similar mistakes as the
story continued.
Similarly, let analytics guide your business decisions, but use data to
also quickly shift course when the story isn’t going your way. Analyt‐
ics provide a valuable framework within which to evaluate your
business decisions. They provide the feedback mechanism that ena‐
bles you to make decisions—both good and bad—and with the
velocity to ensure that many decisions can be changed or quickly
reversed so as not to threaten a successful outcome.
Iterate to Improve Performance
A “Choose Your Own Adventure” book could have numerous possi‐
ble story endings. It was easy to read and re-read the book multiple
times to obtain a better (or the best) outcome. Competitive class‐
mates could even create competitions to see who could achieve the
most successful story outcome in the fewest number of readings.
Analytics are also iterative—we gather data, analyze, and evaluate.
Based on the evaluation, we may take action or change a behavior.
Then, we repeat the analysis and compare the results with the
expected outcome. This iteration and feedback loop is essential to
improving performance.
Beyond just iteration, however, we need to continuously ask our‐
selves new questions. Toyota, for example, introduced the “5 Whys”
interrogative technique. This method of problem solving involved
an approach to iteratively ask and answer questions. By asking 5
questions in succession, one pushes beyond just the symptoms of
the problem and makes rapid progress toward getting to the root
cause of the issue. Often, the answer to the fifth question will point
to the root cause or broken process that needs to be corrected.
Consider an example in the Procurement space to demonstrate how
5 Whys can work:
1. “Which categories of spending should we invest in managing
more effectively”: An initial analysis of ERP systems produces a
ranked list of categories with the highest spend for each of a
company’s five business divisions. This helps with initial priori‐
tization of efforts across thousands of spend categories.
Iterate to Improve Performance 
| 
15

--- PAGE 28 ---
2. “What are the largest categories of spend if we look across
business units”: Several spend categories are rationalized (com‐
bined) across divisions to improve understanding of spend.
This helps to prioritize further analysis according to the
remaining categories with the highest spend.
3. “Are we receiving the same terms from suppliers across our
business units?”: Several suppliers extend varying payment
terms to different business divisions. Across several rationalized
spend categories, opportunities are identified to negotiate most
favorable payment terms.
4. “Do we have the right number of suppliers to support our
spend?”: Further analysis uncovers opportunities to consolidate
suppliers, increase purchasing power, and further reduce costs.
5. “Of the remaining suppliers, are we diversifying our risks suf‐
ficiently?”: Third-party data from Thomson Reuters enriches
supplier data within the ERP systems. A risk assessment
informs decision making to “right-size"” supplier count to
appropriately balance risk and spend concentration across sup‐
pliers.
It’s valuable to be able to iterate on the questions, to continuously
ask deeper questions about your business or an issue, and in so
doing build a more informed understanding of what processes are
driving/influencing your business.
Good analytics infrastructure and tools can facilitate the iteration
espoused by the 5 Whys technique. Rather than constructing a rigid,
monolithic data warehouse, a flexible system is needed that can
easily catalog new available data sources, connect these new sources
of information with your other data sources, and then facilitate the
easy consumption of the data by business intelligence and analytics
tools.
As the Story Progresses, the Data Driving Your
Decisions Will Change
In “Choose Your Own Adventure,” new data could be presented at
any time, in any chapter. Ad hoc decisions/analysis would lead to
new actionable insights.
16 
| 
Chapter 2: Choosing Your Own Adventure in Analytics

--- PAGE 29 ---
In business, you obviously aren’t always confronted with the same
questions or challenges. The economic environment will change,
and competitors will surely come and go. It therefore behooves busi‐
nesses to periodically gather more/new data to analyze. The faster
you can access and exploit new data, the more competitive you can
become in the marketplace.
For example, Custom Automated Prosthetics (CAP-US) is a manu‐
facturer of dental prosthetics and supplier of digital dentistry manu‐
facturing equipment. CAP-US reviewed CRM data to obtain an
understanding of customer interaction—from spend analysis
reports across geographies, to comparative reports that can be used
to evaluate sales rep performance. This information is useful, but it’s
also limited. CAP-US wanted to enrich customer data with informa‐
tion from new sources, enabling deeper and broader analysis of
their business data.
CAP-US achieved new insights by enriching their CRM data with
data from a third-party provider such as Thomson Reuters or
Hoovers. This enrichment enables CAP-US to estimate wallet share
—the portion of total spend a customer spends with CAP-US.
Knowledge of customer size allowed them to more precisely esti‐
mate the potential for expanded business within accounts and
enhance the objectivity of sales rep performance comparisons across
geographies. In addition, CAP-US can easily leverage third-party
information when considering how much credit to extend to new
customers. This results in better control of Accounts Receivable and
reduced bad debts.
A Book with a Changing Story Gets Read
Multiple Times
With “Choose Your Own Adventure,” it was irresistible to read a
book several times in order to see how different decisions impacted
the story outcome. Today, more than 35 years after the first book
was published, the “Choose Your Own Adventure” formula remains
successful, with hundreds of published titles.
In order for businesses to remain successful, they must confront
new challenges, competition, and world events that disrupt the eco‐
nomic environment every day. It’s imperative for businesses to con‐
tinuously diagnose issues, predict business climate change, and
A Book with a Changing Story Gets Read Multiple Times 
| 
17

--- PAGE 30 ---
exploit new opportunities. Businesses need the flexibility to regu‐
larly incorporate new sources of information into the decision-
making process. They need analytics that are fluid and that support
iterative exploration and exploitation of new information. When
you do it well, you’ll recognize mistakes and adjust quickly, iterate
continuously to improve, and use new data to improve decision
making.
18 
| 
Chapter 2: Choosing Your Own Adventure in Analytics

--- PAGE 31 ---
CHAPTER 3
Realizing ROI in Analytics
Eliot Knudsen
“Fast Learners Win”
—Eric Schmidt
In the past decade, the amount of time and money spent on incor‐
porating analytics into business processes has risen to unpreceden‐
ted levels. Data-driven decisions that used to be a C-suite luxury
(costing a small fortune in consulting) are now expected from every
operating executive. Gut feelings and anecdotal cases are no longer
acceptable. “In God we trust, everyone else bring data” has become
the slogan of a generation.
Large organizations have hundreds of processes, strategic initiatives,
and channels—all waiting to be optimized—and increasing business
complexity has only amplified the demand for analytic solutions.
But despite the tremendous demand, supply, and investment, there
is one major missing link: value. Do you really know whether your
analytics are living up to their lofty expectations?
To unpack this, we first have to dive a little deeper into the different
tiers of analytics: descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive. Descrip‐
tive analytics summarize historical data—these are reports and dash‐
boards. Predictive analytics projects the most likely outcome given
future or unlabeled data points—these are recommendations or
classifications. Finally, the highest tier is prescriptive analytics, which
combine predictions and feedback—measuring accuracy of predic‐
tions over time.
19

--- PAGE 32 ---
One great example of prescriptive analytics is the Amazon product
page and shopping cart. At the bottom of each product page there
are recommendations of commonly bundled items. These recom‐
mendations are predictions of cross-selling opportunities. Most
importantly: with the shopping cart, Amazon has a feedback mecha‐
nism to track the success (or failure) of its recommendations. Ama‐
zon is embedding prescriptive recommendations into the
purchasing process.
That feedback mechanism is the cornerstone of what allows Ama‐
zon to measure the “realized ROI” of the predictions: a transaction-
level data collection of the outcomes. This feedback mechanism is
the most critical, yet least understood, component of successful pre‐
scriptive analytics. Without it your analytical projects are likely to be
one-offs and ineffective.
The Lifecycle for a Feedback System
Analytics, just like software projects, have a lifecycle of develop‐
ment. You can split these into three categories: (1) data and require‐
ment discovery, (2) feature engineering and modeling, and (3)
online learning.
1. Data and Requirement Discovery. When first embarking on
an analytics project, there is a period when the business value is
known, but finding the associated data to drive insight is
unknown.
2. Feature Engineering and Modeling. There is an art to applying
the right model and transformations to the dataset and domain.
Generally, the more data, the less you have to rely on obscure
concepts like bias/variance trade-off.
3. Feedback. Just completing feature engineering and modeling
gives a predictive model, which can be applied to a set of prob‐
lems. Understanding whether that model is working, and incre‐
mentally improving it, is called “online learning.”
The Measurements for a Feedback System
Before designing an analytic system, the most important task is to
distill success and failure into a measure of accuracy. How will the
value of the application be affected by your predictive application?
20 
| 
Chapter 3: Realizing ROI in Analytics

--- PAGE 33 ---
In statistical lingo, the mathematical formula for accuracy is called
your “loss function.”
For example, if you recommend a product on Amazon: what is the
implication if you recommend a bad product? How about not rec‐
ommending the precisely correct product? How about when you
recommend the correct product, whether that translates into a
larger shopping cart? In this case, like most cases, it depends. Is
Amazon trying to help customers save money? Increase their oper‐
ating margin? Reduce inventory at a fulfillment center?
Here success or failure is the business objective with a measurable
outcome. The accuracy of the recommendation system should be
based on this objective. There are three common accuracy metrics
that combine to make your “loss function”:
1. How many recommendations do you miss?
2. How many recommendations are incorrect?
3. How many recommendations are not acted upon?
How many recommendations do you miss?
All predictive algorithms are just that: predictive. They have
uncertainty and risk. Do you always want your algorithm to
predict an event, even if it doesn’t have a high degree of
confidence that your prediction will be correct? That
depends on your applications. The loss is: the opportunity
cost associated with not making a recommendation.
How many recommendations are incorrect?
What if your algorithm makes a prediction and gets it
wrong? If someone acts on the incorrect prediction, what is
the cost? How many predictions does your algorithm have
to get wrong before people to start ignoring it all together?
The loss is: the cost associated with making an incorrect
recommendation.
How many recommendations are not acted upon?
What if you make a prediction and it’s correct. Does this
turn into dollars? While at an outcome level, this has the
same result as (1), it requires a very different solution. Mak‐
ing good technology is one thing, but changing human
behavior can be a different challenge entirely. The loss is:
The Measurements for a Feedback System 
| 
21

--- PAGE 34 ---
the opportunity cost associated with not making a recom‐
mendation.
One important note is that it’s much easier to get feedback on incor‐
rect recommendations than missed recommendations. Users can
find mistakes quickly, describe why they’re incorrect, and the algo‐
rithms can adjust accordingly. When algorithms aren’t able to deter‐
mine a good recommendation at all, users have to do a lot more
work. They not only have to go out and find the correct answer, but
they also have to make a decision in the absence of an alternative.
This means that feedback collection is naturally skewed toward (2)
and (3) above, and measuring (1) is more challenging.
Unfortunately, this isn’t all just numbers. It has been shown that we
have very different emotional reactions between opportunity cost
and clear cost. Similarly, the absence of a prediction is often more
justifiable than a blatantly incorrect one, but perhaps not as justifia‐
ble as having the prediction and not acting on it. That’s why it’s criti‐
cal to define the trade-off between the three. It will not only provide
a clearer path of development for your analytics, but also map the
project to business value. However, before you can even begin such
analytics, you need to have an infrastructure to support it.
The Database for a Feedback System
While building analytical systems, starting from a solid set of com‐
ponents for data movement, storage and modeling can be the differ‐
ence between a fast or slow iteration cycle. The last 20 years of data
warehousing have been dominated by the idea of a unilateral data
flow—out of applications and into a central warehouse. In this
model, enterprises have been focused on reducing the latency
between when data is captured to movement, and supporting more
users with richer queries in the data warehouse. In the new para‐
digm of a feedback system, the warehouse will have to become more
dynamic and bidirectional.
The cost (read: time) of adding data variety (i.e., new attributes for
analysis) is critical. Adjusting algorithms based on feedback and
constant validation is often constrained by the number of data sci‐
entists available. If adding this feedback scales with your technical
resources, as many data warehousing solutions do today, then stick‐
ing to predictive and historic analytics is the path of least resistance.
22 
| 
Chapter 3: Realizing ROI in Analytics

--- PAGE 35 ---
Equally critical is the bidirectional nature of information. Not only
are you pulling data from systems in order to build predictive mod‐
els, but you also have to supplement your workflow with predictions
to capture the value. Most applications can’t be retrofitted to display
predictions and don’t have the flexibility to add this in-app to the
workflow, so frequently the warehouse will have to trace predictions
to outcomes. Alternatively, application-specific data marts can be
used to house and populate these predictions.
Regardless, the days of static and enterprise-wide data warehouses
are coming to an end. The acceleration of analytics delivered by
highly engineered feedback systems trumps the benefit from more
centralized and usable data.
The ROI of a Feedback System
Building analytical-driven systems is about more than just confirm‐
ing the benefits of data-driven decisions. It’s a fundamental muscle
of a well-operated organization. It makes objectives more tangible
and measurable, and connects process with observable behavior.
The transparency and accountability empowers teams to set aggres‐
sive targets, and aligns them around a set of tools to achieve those
targets. Finally, building analytical-driven systems is about develop‐
ing a behavior of rigorous experimentation that speeds up learning.
The ROI of a Feedback System 
| 
23

--- PAGE 36 ---

--- PAGE 37 ---
CHAPTER 4
Procurement Analytics
Matt Holzapfel
Procurement makes an excellent example of an analytics use case
because, like so many analytics projects, the first step is simplifying
the complexity and cutting through a vast quantity of data. Data-
complexity problems are particularly large in procurement because
procurement interacts with every function in an organization and
must analyze internal and external information to be effective. For‐
tunately, the reward of effective procurement analytics is large, as
improvements in procurement performance have an immediate and
direct impact on profitability.
Defining Analytics for Procurement
“Are we going to be predicting commodity prices?”
That was the first thought that came to my mind when my manager
told me he wanted my help to build the analytics capabilities of our
sourcing team. I had a tough time understanding how we would use
analytics when so much of my job involved negotiating with suppli‐
ers and debating internally which supplier should win an RFQ.
After a lengthy conversation with my manager, I realized he was
struggling with an overwhelming amount of complex information
being sent to him by suppliers and colleagues—from lead-time
reports to technology roadmaps. He didn’t need someone to help
him predict the price of copper. He needed help simplifying the
information flow so that he could make decisions more quickly and
confidently. In other words, analytics weren’t supposed to replace
25

--- PAGE 38 ---
the need for judgment, they were an enabler for making better deci‐
sions.
This chapter will explore a few of the ways analytics can be used to
help procurement leaders make better decisions.
Starting with Analytics
Mike Tyson famously said, “everyone has a plan until they get
punched in the mouth.” In procurement, everyone has a plan until
suppliers decide to raise prices.
Sourcing managers start the year with a good sense of how they’re
going to achieve their savings goals. Unfortunately, things don’t
always go as planned. One painfully memorable experience came
when I ran an RFQ on one of my company’s highest-volume prod‐
ucts. I expected the RFQ to follow its historic pattern—initial prices
might be 5–10% above our target, but with some negotiation, final
prices would reach our target. Instead, initial quotes came in 40–
50% above our target. Despite our best efforts, we weren’t able to get
close to our price target, threatening our ability to meet our annual
savings goal.
We had to throw out our plan for the year and quickly devise a new
plan for bringing down costs somewhere else to make up for the
price increase. The number of options were overwhelming. Do we
bundle spend on other product lines to get better pricing? Do we
dual-source more components to put pressure on suppliers?
Fortunately, we made significant investments in our analytics capa‐
bilities and could estimate the impact of each option before making
a decision. This saved us from chasing insignificant opportunities,
and helped us identify opportunities that we had been neglecting.
Further, it taught us the importance of having a holistic plan for
sourcing, instead of relying on the same behaviors to continue to
produce the same results.
Analytics Use Case 1
Estimate the impact of strategic sourcing initiatives and prioritize
appropriately.
Procurement teams that start the year by analyzing a variety of cost
savings opportunities, before making prioritization decisions, put
26 
| 
Chapter 4: Procurement Analytics

--- PAGE 39 ---
themselves in a great position to achieve their goals. The number of
possible initiatives a procurement team can prioritize is high; and
this problem is exacerbated by a constant inflow of email from col‐
leagues and executives with ideas on ways to improve.
Procurement teams that make data and analytics a core part of how
they prioritize decisions benefit from having a roadmap they can
share internally, that outlines when they will be tackling opportuni‐
ties in their spend. This has the dual benefit of deflecting one-off,
and potentially distracting requests, while establishing procurement
as a thought leader in the company.
Using Analytics to Do More with Less
A comprehensive study done by AT Kearney in late 2014 showed
that 75% of procurement organizations have not improved their
productivity since 2011. This seems hard to believe given procure‐
ment’s constant push for efficiency gains, declining commodity pri‐
ces, and the rise of technology designed to make businesses more
efficient. This is especially troubling with sales growth stagnating at
the world’s largest companies.
One reason for this slump is that spend is becoming more difficult
to analyze. Record levels of M&A and the growth of outsourcing
have significantly increased the number of data sources and variety
of data formats needed to gain full spend visibility. As a result, many
organizations struggle to answer basic questions like, “how many
suppliers do I have?,” and “what’s my spend per category?”—let
alone answer more complex questions like “what’s the impact on my
spend if the price of steel rises 10%?” If procurement teams are
going to be able to do more with less, they need to be able to answer
these questions quickly, so that they can spend less time debating
decisions and more time acting on insight.
One of the biggest opportunities missed by sourcing teams without
full spend visibility is cost savings in the long tail of spend. The aver‐
age organization has only 55–60% of its spend under management,
while best-in-class performers manage close to 85%. If we assume a
procurement organization can achieve 5–10% savings on spend that
it brings under management, then bringing an additional 20% of
spend under management can lead to an additional 1–2% of total
annual savings on all spend.
Analytics Use Case 1 
| 
27

--- PAGE 40 ---
Managing more of this long tail spend is often an analytics problem.
Sourcing managers can’t manage this spend at the same level of
depth as their top spend items, and must instead rely on analytics to
help them identify savings opportunities, such as removing a cate‐
gory from their budget, outsourcing the management of the cate‐
gory to a third party, consolidating the supply base, or aggregating
bundles of spend into a single contract. Sourcing leaders should
dedicate their most data-driven sourcing managers to get this spend
under control by using analytics that help answer critical questions
about their long tail spend, such as “why are we buying these
items?” and “can we be solely focused on cost?”
Analytics Use Case 2
Reduce long tail spend by identifying categories and suppliers that can
be removed, consolidated, or offloaded.
Luckily, sourcing teams don’t need to solve this problem alone.
Spend analytics solutions from providers such as Tamr, Rosslyn
Analytics, and Opera Solutions can pull information from across
many different types of internal and external sources—from ERP
and Excel to third-party financial databases—and standardize this
information to make it easy to spot spend overlaps or supply chain
risks. This means procurement leaders no longer need to wait for IT
to consolidate technology infrastructure, to reap the benefits of
clean, consolidated spend data.
Getting a Voice at the Table, Through Analytics
The term “strategic sourcing” has permeated the procurement func‐
tion for the past 20 years, but is often hard to describe and even
harder to achieve. A survey of Chief Procurement Officers (CPOs)
conducted by Deloitte in 2014 showed that 72% of CPOs rated their
procurement functions as having mixed or poor effectiveness as
strategic business partners. One reason for this deficiency is that
strategic sourcing requires managers to have a holistic view of their
business, one that goes beyond procurement.
In addition to spend data, strategic sourcing managers need on-
demand access to information such as commodity trends, product
quality data, supply data, and sales performance. On-demand access
to this data is essential for procurement to serve as a trusted advisor
28 
| 
Chapter 4: Procurement Analytics

--- PAGE 41 ---
to engineering and finance, and be viewed internally as an impor‐
tant strategic function.
A strong relationship between engineering and procurement for
direct spend is essential to delivering a great customer experience. If
engineering has too much clout, it can be impossible for procure‐
ment to maintain the respect of its suppliers. For example, the sup‐
pliers who recognize engineering’s power will spend their time
catering to all of engineering’s needs, knowing they can charge
whatever prices they want.
Procurement can mitigate this risk by serving as strong partners for
engineering. This includes engaging with engineering early in the
product design cycle to inform them of key cost trends that could
impact how they design the product. This also includes sharing
detailed, fact-based supplier scorecards so that everyone has the
same understanding of supplier performance and can make deci‐
sions that optimize the entire product lifecycle.
Analytics Use Case 3
Provide fact-based insight, such as cost trends, that can influence
design decisions and position procurement as a trusted advisor for
engineering.
Procurement should also be looking for ways to enhance its rela‐
tionship with finance. Procurement teams who successfully create
value for their finance colleagues enjoy the benefits of seeing
increased investment in the procurement function and are given
more input into strategic decisions. Two ways procurement can
improve this relationship is by communicating cost forecasts, even if
they are only directional estimates, and staying ahead of trends in
technology and third-party services.
The idea of cost forecasting sounds intimidating when so much of a
company’s spend relies on a wide range of factors. For example, the
amount a company spends on travel is influenced by the cost of
travel as well as the amount employees need to travel. Both of these
factors vary with the global economy, the health of the airline indus‐
try, commodity prices, and the company’s priorities. The key to sim‐
plifying this exercise is classifying spend at a granular level. It’s
extremely difficult to identify patterns in “travel and entertainment”
costs. If spend is classified into more detailed categories, such as “air
Analytics Use Case 3 
| 
29

--- PAGE 42 ---
travel for a conference” and “air travel for a customer visit,” it
becomes easier to understand the drivers of spend and to forecast
future spend.
Analytics Use Case 4
Forecast costs using a granular level of spend classification.
Another way procurement can become a better partner for finance
is by monitoring trends in technology and third-party services. This
enables procurement to advise finance on how to budget for these
products and services in coming years. It also helps procurement
and finance have better conversations with colleagues about the
impact of purchasing these products or services, so that money is
used most effectively and colleagues begin to think of procurement
as thought partners instead of red tape.
Procurement teams looking to improve their relationships with
finance and engineering must make it a priority to think about their
business holistically. This often requires behavior change, as lower
importance procurement initiatives must get deprioritized to make
time for preparing information that is valuable to other functions.
Fortunately, the reward for being a good partner can be significant.
Procurement teams who successfully establish themselves as strate‐
gic business partners to finance and engineering enjoy the benefits
of being judged by more than just the savings numbers they report
and get to take part in strategic discussions about the future of their
companies.
Procurement Analytics as a Starting Point
“Getting analytics right” in the context of procurement means using
analytics to simplify the vast amount of complexity inherent to the
function. Other functions in an organization suffer from these same
problems, and solving them for procurement first can serve as a
blueprint for other functions. Further, improving the analytics capa‐
bilities of procurement can drive immediate cost savings, which can
be reinvested into other areas of the business to improve their capa‐
bilities.
30 
| 
Chapter 4: Procurement Analytics

--- PAGE 43 ---
About the Authors
Nidhi Aggarwal leads strategy and marketing at Tamr. Prior to join‐
ing Tamr, Nidhi founded Cloud vLab, makers of qwikLAB, a
software-learning platform used to create and deploy on-demand
lab environments. In the years before Cloud vLab, Nidhi worked at
McKinsey & Company, advising Fortune 150 companies on big data
strategy. Nidhi holds a PhD in computer science from the University
of Wisconsin-Madison.
With over 20 years of experience in consulting services and soft‐
ware, Byron Berk currently leads the Customer Success team at
Tamr, Inc. Prior to joining Tamr, Byron was the Director of Profes‐
sional Services and Training for Hewlett-Packard’s software business
unit, where he led the development of the services and education
organization for HP Vertica. Byron is a graduate of Dartmouth Col‐
lege and has an MBA from Babson F.W. Olin Graduate School of
Business.
Gideon Goldin is User Experience Architect at Tamr, where he
focuses on product research and design. Prior to Tamr, Gideon
served as a university lecturer and cofounder of DataScale Consult‐
ing, a data science and user experience firm. He holds a Masters in
Human-Computer Interaction and a PhD in Cognitive Science from
Brown University.
Matt Holzapfel is a procurement analytics evangelist at Tamr, Inc.
Prior to consulting with Tamr, Matt held positions in Strategy at
Sears Holdings and Strategic Sourcing at Dell, where he led the
implementation of new sourcing techniques to significantly lower
procurement costs. Matt has a BS in Mechanical Engineering from
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and is a recent grad‐
uate of Harvard Business School.
Eliot Knudsen is a Field Architect at Tamr, where he works on tech‐
nical implementation and deployment. He’s worked with Fortune
100 clients to dramatically reduce spend by unifying sourcing data
and implementing procurement analytics. Prior to Tamr, Eliot was a
Data Scientist in Healthcare IT, applying machine learning to
patient-provider matching algorithms. Eliot is a graduate of
Carnegie Mellon University, where he studied computational mathe‐
matics, statistics, and machine learning.

