--- PAGE 1 ---
8/11/2019
What is Exploratory Data Analysis? - Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15
1/8
What is Exploratory Data Analysis?
Prasad Patil
Mar 23, 2018 · 6 min read
. . .
As I was contemplating what could be the maiden topic I should begin writing my blog
with, in no time EDA popped up to my mind.Logically apt , isn’t it ?! Why? You’ll find
out soon!
Intuition
Imagine your wolf pack decides to watch a movie you haven’t heard of.There is
absolutely no debate about that,it will lead to a state where you find yourself puzzled
with lot of questions which needs to be answered in order to make a decision.Being a
good chieftain the first question you would ask, what is the cast and crew of the movie?
As a regular practice,you would also watch the trailer of the movie on
YouTube.Furthermore,you’d find out ratings and reviews the movie has received from
the audience.
Whatever investigating measures you would take before finally buying popcorn for
your clan in theater,is nothing but what data scientists in their lingo call ‘Exploratory
Data Analysis’.

--- PAGE 2 ---
8/11/2019
What is Exploratory Data Analysis? - Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15
2/8
Exploratory Data Analysis refers to the critical
process of performing initial investigations on data
so as to discover patterns,to spot anomalies,to test
hypothesis and to check assumptions with the help
of summary statistics and graphical
representations.
It is a good practice to understand the data first and try to gather as many insights from
it. EDA is all about making sense of data in hand,before getting them dirty with it.
EDA explained using sample Data set:
To share my understanding of the concept and techniques I know,I’ll take an example
of white variant of Wine Quality data set which is available on UCI Machine Learning
Repository and try to catch hold of as many insights from the data set using EDA.
To starts with,I imported necessary libraries (for this example pandas,
numpy,matplotlib and seaborn) and loaded the data set.
Note : Whatever inferences I could extract,I’ve mentioned with bullet points.
Original data is separated by delimiter “ ; “ in given data set.
To take a closer look at the data took help of “ .head()”function of pandas library
which returns first five observations of the data set.Similarly “.tail()” returns last
five observations of the data set.
I found out the total number of rows and columns in the data set using “.shape”.

--- PAGE 3 ---
8/11/2019
What is Exploratory Data Analysis? - Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15
3/8
Dataset comprises of 4898 observations and 12 characteristics.
Out of which one is dependent variable and rest 11 are independent variables —
physico-chemical characteristics.
It is also a good practice to know the columns and their corresponding data types,along
with finding whether they contain null values or not.
Data has only float and integer values.
No variable column has null/missing values.
The describe() function in pandas is very handy in getting various summary
statistics.This function returns the count, mean, standard deviation, minimum and
maximum values and the quantiles of the data.

--- PAGE 4 ---
8/11/2019
What is Exploratory Data Analysis? - Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15
4/8
Here as you can notice mean value is less than median value of each column which
is represented by 50%(50th percentile) in index column.
There is notably a large difference between 75th %tile and max values of predictors
“residual sugar”,”free sulfur dioxide”,”total sulfur dioxide”.
Thus observations 1 and 2 suggests that there are extreme values-Outliers in our
data set.
Few key insights just by looking at dependent variable are as follows:
Target variable/Dependent variable is discrete and categorical in nature.
“quality” score scale ranges from 1 to 10;where 1 being poor and 10 being the best.
1,2 & 10 Quality ratings are not given by any observation. Only scores obtained are
between 3 to 9.
This tells us vote count of each quality score in descending order.
“quality” has most values concentrated in the categories 5, 6 and 7.
Only a few observations made for the categories 3 & 9.
I got a good a glimpse of data. But that’s the thing with Data Science the more you get
involved the harder it is for you to stop exploring.Let’s now explore data with beautiful
graphs. Python has a visualization library ,Seaborn which build on top of matplotlib. It
provides very attractive statistical graphs in order to perform both Univariate and
Multivariate analysis.

--- PAGE 5 ---
8/11/2019
What is Exploratory Data Analysis? - Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15
5/8
To use linear regression for modelling,its necessary to remove correlated variables to
improve your model.One can find correlations using pandas “.corr()” function and can
visualize the correlation matrix using a heatmap in seaborn.
Heatmap
Dark shades represents positive correlation while lighter shades represents
negative correlation.
If you set annot=True, you’ll get values by which features are correlated to each
other in grid-cells.
It’s a good practice to remove correlated variables during feature selection.

--- PAGE 6 ---
8/11/2019
What is Exploratory Data Analysis? - Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15
6/8
Correlation Matrix
Here we can infer that “density” has strong positive correlation with “residual
sugar” whereas it has strong negative correlation with “alcohol”.
“free sulphur dioxide” and “citric acid” has almost no correlation with “quality”.
Since correlation is zero we can infer there is no linear relationship between these
two predictors.However it is safe to drop these features in case you’re applying
Linear Regression model to the dataset.
A box plot (or box-and-whisker plot) shows the distribution of quantitative data in a
way that facilitates comparisons between variables.The box shows the quartiles of the
dataset while the whiskers extend to show the rest of the distribution.
The box plot (a.k.a. box and whisker diagram) is a standardized way of displaying the
distribution of data based on the five number summary:
Minimum
First quartile
Median
Third quartile
Maximum.

--- PAGE 7 ---
8/11/2019
What is Exploratory Data Analysis? - Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15
7/8
In the simplest box plot the central rectangle spans the first quartile to the third
quartile (the interquartile range or IQR).
A segment inside the rectangle shows the median and “whiskers” above and below the
box show the locations of the minimum and maximum.
Boxplot
Outliers are either 3×IQR or more above the third quartile or 3×IQR or more below
the first quartile.
In our data set except “alcohol” all other features columns shows outliers.
Now to check the linearity of the variables it is a good practice to plot distribution
graph and look for skewness of features. Kernel density estimate (kde) is a quite useful
tool for plotting the shape of a distribution.
Distribution Plot
“pH” column appears to be normally distributed
remaining all independent variables are right skewed/positively skewed.

--- PAGE 8 ---
8/11/2019
What is Exploratory Data Analysis? - Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15
8/8
Lastly, to sum up all Exploratory Data Analysis is a philosophical and an artistical
approach to guage every nuance from the data at early encounter.
You can glance through my jupyter notebook here and try-test with different
approaches, for eg. try out a pairplot and share what all inferences you could grab from
it or if I failed to capture any useful information in my own approach,do share that too
in comments.
Data Science
Exploratory Data Analysis
Machine Learning
Data Visualization
Pipeline
About
Help
Legal

