--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
Make Data Work
strataconf.com
Presented by O’Reilly and Cloudera, 
Strata + Hadoop World is where 
cutting-edge data science and new 
business fundamentals intersect—
and merge.
n Learn business applications of 
data technologies
n Develop new skills through 
trainings and in-depth tutorials
n Connect with an international 
community of thousands who 
work with data
Job # 15420

--- PAGE 3 ---
Mike Barlow
Data Visualization
A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 4 ---
Data Visualization
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938
or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Mike Loukides
October 2014:
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2014-10-14: First release
2015-03-06: Second release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Data Visualization:
A New Language for Storytelling and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod‐
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and
O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been
printed in caps or initial caps.
The cover image is a visualization of New York hospitals using https://mapsdata.co.uk.
While the publisher and the author(s) have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author(s) disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to open
source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility to
ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.
ISBN: 978-1-491-94503-2
[LSI]

--- PAGE 5 ---
Table of Contents
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
An Emerging Universal Medium                                                      1
Making Points, Deflating Arguments                                               4
Exploratory Versus Explanatory Visualization                                5
Best of Both Worlds?                                                                         10
Challenges, Perils, and Pitfalls                                                         11
Worth a Thousand Words?                                                              14
A Range of Techniques for Visualizing Data                                 14
Going Mainstream?                                                                           17
iii

--- PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---
What is good visualization? It is a
representation of data that helps you see
what you otherwise would have been
blind to if you looked only at the naked
source. It enables you to see trends,
patterns and outliers that tell you about
yourself and what surrounds you.
—Nathan Yau, Data Points (Wiley)
Data Visualization: A New
Language for Storytelling
An Emerging Universal Medium
When was the last time you saw a business presentation that did not
include at least one slide with a bar graph or a pie chart? Data visual‐
izations have become so ubiquitous that we no longer find them re‐
markable.
And yet they are remarkable. Consider this observation from the Sec‐
ond Edition of The Visual Display of Quantitative Information
(Graphics Pr) by Edward R. Tufte:
The use of abstract, non-representational pictures to show numbers
is a surprisingly recent invention, perhaps because of the diversity of
skills required—the visual-artistic, empirical-statistical, and mathe‐
matical. It was not until 1750–1800 that statistical graphics—length
and area to show quantity, time-series, scatterplots, and multivariate
displays—were invented, long after such triumphs of mathematical
ingenuity as logarithms, Cartesian coordinates, the calculus, and the
basics of probability theory.
1

--- PAGE 8 ---
It seems counterintuitive to believe that a phenomenon can be re‐
markable and commonplace at the same time. But there are plenty of
examples: birdsong, beautiful sunsets, pizza, sex—to name a few.
Some argue that data graphics have already become a sort of lingua
franca, a common global language crossing boundaries of culture and
politics. Nathan Yau sees data visualization “as a medium rather than
a specific tool.” Good data visualizations are more than just endpoints
of analytic processes; they are platforms for telling stories, conveying
knowledge, eliciting emotions, and sparking curiosity.
At their most basic level, visualizations enable us to compare numbers
(or sets of numbers) quickly. Visualizations rely on our innate human
ability to discern patterns rapidly and convert them into usable infor‐
mation. Our early ancestors needed pattern-recognition skills to keep
them safe from camouflaged predators.
Data visualizations appeal to similar circuits in our brains. The major
difference between us and our ancestors is situational. They were
looking for signs of predators or prey; we’re trying to figure out where
to invest the money in our retirement accounts.
“When you’re dealing with more than two numbers, it’s much easier
to compare them if they’re shown in a chart than if they’re shown in
a tabular format,” says Francois Ajenstat, director of product manage‐
ment at Tableau. “Maybe it’s better to ask, ‘When is a visualization not
the right approach?’ When you’re looking at an invoice, for example,
you just want to see the numbers. But when you’re looking at rows and
columns of data, then visualization is actually the beginning of the
analytics process.”
Noah Iliinsky works at IBM’s Center for Advanced Visualization. An
evangelist for data visualization, he advocates a rigorously disciplined
approach.
“There are four rules that I’ve come up with, and I think they’re pretty
sound,” he told an audience at the O’Reilly Strata Conference + Ha‐
doop World in New York City in October 2013. “The first is purpose:
why are you doing this visualization? The second is content: what are
you trying to visualize? The third is structure: how are you going to
visualize it? how do we best reveal the most important data and rela‐
tionships? The fourth is formatting: how will it look and feel? How
will it be consumed? Formatting is the icing on the cake!”
2 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 9 ---
1. Commenting on an earlier draft of this paper, Jeffrey Heer, professor of Computer
Science at the University of Washington, writes, “The systematic study of visual en‐
coding traces back to French cartographer and designer Jacques Bertin; his seminal
book, The Semiology of Graphic, is a powerhouse! Visual encoding was made the object
of experimental study by statistician William S. Cleveland and colleagues, who pub‐
lished papers on the topic back in the 1980s. These are true giants in the field of data
visualization, on par with Edward Tufte.”
Even if your purpose is clear and your data is sound, your choice of
structure is critical.1 For example, if you’re trying to highlight rela‐
tionships among data points, use scatterplots, matrix charts, or net‐
work diagrams. For showing parts of a whole, use pie charts or tree‐
maps.
If your goal is comparing a set of values, use bar charts, block histo‐
grams, or bubble charts. When you’re tracking data that rises and falls
over time, use line graphs or stack graphs. When you’re analyzing text,
use word trees or tag clouds.
Your choice of “visual encoding”—all of the possible formatting op‐
tions available—is also crucial. Picking the wrong structure or the
wrong format can obscure your data or create misleading impressions.
In many instances, the simplest structures and formats can be the most
powerful. The value of stark simplicity is illustrated by the following
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling 
| 
3

--- PAGE 10 ---
bar chart, which compares iPhone sales with total Microsoft revenues
over a three-month period in 2011.
Ideally, says Iliinsky, following the rules enables you to create a visu‐
alization that “tells the story” of the underlying data set. “We have
incredible software in our brain and incredible hardware in our optical
system that make us extremely good at pattern recognition and pattern
matching,” he says. “We’re also good at spotting where the pattern is
broken, where there are gaps and outliers.” Good data visualizations
bring patterns, trends, gaps, and outliers to the surface, making them
visible to our eyes and accessible to our brains.
“Visualizations give us access to huge amounts of data, very rapidly,”
says Iliinsky. “Visualizations play to the skills that are wired into our
brains. Those are skills we don’t have to learn—we already have them,
free of charge.”
Making Points, Deflating Arguments
Author and researcher Richard Florida has built a successful career on
data analysis and data visualization. Florida, a professor at New York
University and the University of Toronto, is the author of three best‐
sellers, The Rise of the Creative Class (Basic Books), Cities and the
4 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 11 ---
Creative Class (Routledge), and The Flight of the Creative Class (Harp‐
er Business). He is also a senior editor at The Atlantic.
“Data visualizations, especially maps, have been extremely helpful in
my writing at Atlantic Cities. They’ve helped me provide readers with
a visual understanding of complex issues, specifically when looking at
questions of geography,” says Florida. “For example, in order to help
visualize the significant class and workforce divide in our cities, I have
used a series of maps to illustrate the point. The maps have been useful
in identifying patterns and understanding economic development
trends. If you were to look at the body of my work at Atlantic Cities,
you’ll see that maps…are a central piece of my work.”
Data visualizations can also deflate an argument. A good example of
this is “512 Paths to the White House,” a comprehensive interactive
graphic that showed the inevitability of President Obama’s reelection.
The graphic was created for The New York Times by Mike Bostock and
Shan Carter and was published at a point in the campaign when many
journalists, politicians, and pollsters were describing the race as a
largely even match.
“Shan and I felt like TV anchors spent a lot of time talking about hy‐
potheticals prior to election night,” says Bostock. Although there were
at least 512 possible scenarios, the anchors “could only discuss one
scenario at a time,” recalls Bostock. As a result, viewers “had very little
understanding of how likely this particular scenario was, and what the
overall probabilities were.”
The interactive visualization created by Bostock and Carter enabled
readers to consider all 512 paths and assess for themselves the likeli‐
hood of a Romney victory. “So we lost that edge-of-your-seat dramatic
television experience, but we gained a better understanding of what
was happening,” says Bostock.
Exploratory Versus Explanatory Visualization
It seems fair to say that data visualization is essentially a form of story‐
telling. But in the same way that you wouldn’t necessarily share a Ste‐
phen King story with a group of toddlers or tell children’s bedtime
stories to middle-aged adults at a cocktail party, different audiences
need different types of data visualization.
“Exploratory graphics are something you make for yourself, while ex‐
pository (or explanatory) graphics are something you make for oth‐
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling 
| 
5

--- PAGE 12 ---
ers,” says Bostock. “The primary goal of exploratory visualization is
speed—to find insights quickly—and preferably in a comprehensive,
unbiased way.”
Anne Milley, a senior director of analytics at SAS, sees visualization as
“the key to achieving efficiency and effectiveness in the value creation
process.” Visualization, from her perspective, unlocks the real value of
data. “In the discovery phase of analysis, visualization maximizes use
of the analyst’s visual bandwidth and frees up working memory, of
which we have so little. As the analyst, you are both information pro‐
ducer and consumer. As you visually explore the data, what you see
informs your next step,” says Milley.
Because an analyst typically looks at many graphs during the explor‐
atory phase, “those graphs should be quick and easy to create,” says
Milley. “Visual data exploration lets you stay in flow and keep yourself
focused on solving the problem at hand. And it also helps you see if
there’s something interesting in the data that you might have missed
when it was in tabular form.”
The process for creating explanatory visualizations is generally slower,
“because you have to externalize the context you gained exploring,
which means annotations and views intended to reveal those specific
insights. Think of exploratory graphics as reading and expository
graphics as teaching,” says Bostock.
Rachel Binx is a cofounder of Meshu, a company that converts per‐
sonal travel data into custom jewelry. In a previous role at San
Francisco-based Stamen Design, she worked with clients such as MTV,
Facebook, and the MoMA. “Exploratory visualization is most often
done by and for the people closest to the data,” says Binx. “So you can
get away with making obtuse, unclear, or hard-to-use visualizations,
because the ‘audience’ usually already understands the data, and is
invested in the exploration.”
Exploratory visualization can also be used to test insights with small
audiences before the data is “ready for prime time.” Ofer Mendelevitch,
director of data sciences at Horntonworks, uses healthcare data as an
example. “Let’s say you’ve got data about patients and medications. As
a data scientist, you can run a model. But you might not have the
expertise to know if the data is good or bad. So it makes sense to create
a simple chart, just something with an X and Y axis, and show the chart
to a subject matter expert. The expert should be able to tell you if
6 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 13 ---
something looks strange. Maybe you have the wrong algorithm, or
maybe your data is skewed.”
Following are six images from a Hortonworks tutorial on visualized
clickstream data. In this example, the weblog data is combined with
CRM data to visualize customer behavior. The following image shows
raw data received from the Hortonworks website.
The following image shows data brought into HDFS and placed in a
table.
Next, the data is processed using Hive.
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling 
| 
7

--- PAGE 14 ---
After being processed in Hive, the data is brought into Excel.
Now all the data from Hadoop is in Excel.
8 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 15 ---
The final step is creating a visualization in Excel.
In this example, the visualization is likely to be used for exploratory
purposes. But it could also be used as an explanatory visualization in
a presentation for internal users or partners.
It’s important to distinguish between exploratory and explanatory vis‐
ualization because each represents a different use case, according to
Scott Murray, a code artist and an assistant professor of design at the
University of San Francisco, where he teaches data visualization and
interaction design. “Exploratory visualization is helpful when you
have a new data set, but don’t yet know what story it’s trying to tell you.
So you need to explore the data, visually, to get a sense of any inter‐
esting patterns and trends. This usually involves either an interactive
visualization (so you can quickly compose different views of the data)
or using a tool that quickly generates and outputs multiple views on
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling 
| 
9

--- PAGE 16 ---
its own. For example, R and Tableau are used heavily for this explor‐
atory process, because they can quickly generate tons of different views
into the data,” says Murray. “Once you know the story, you enter the
explanatory phase, in which you’re designing a more limited, yet re‐
fined view optimized for communicating that story to someone else.
Usually, that ‘someone else’ isn’t familiar with the data, and doesn’t
have a sense of the larger context,” he continues. “A good explanatory
visualization will provide that context and highlight the portions of
the data that you feel are most meaningful.”
Best of Both Worlds?
Not every data visualization falls neatly into the “exploratory” or “ex‐
planatory” category. Some appear to reside happily in both worlds.
The MasterCard Mobile Payments Readiness Index presents more
than 50 different kinds of data from multiple sources in a coherent,
interactive, and highly appealing graphic. The index was produced by
MasterCard’s Global Insights team. The visualization was led by Adam
Bell, a Vice President/Business Leader for Global Insights and Mas‐
terCard Advisors.
It began as an effort to leverage data about mobile payments from 34
markets in various parts of the world. Developing a better under‐
standing of the data was important to MasterCard, which is a key
player in the emerging mobile payments sector.
“We were trying to determine which markets were ready to adopt
mobile payment methods,” says Bell. “Knowing where to focus your
efforts is important for us and important for the industry.”
The project had two distinct phases. The first was collecting, gathering,
organizing, and analyzing data from multiple markets across the
globe. The second phase was creating a presentation layer that was easy
to understand and also conveyed the complexity of the underlying
data. “We needed to formulate a strong hypothesis, follow it up with
evidence, write a story around the evidence, and then bring it to life
visually,” Bell explains. “The visualization really showcases the data,
so the design and execution are absolutely critical.”
10 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 17 ---
Figure 1. MasterCard Mobile Payments Readiness Index
The index was used internally as a tool for exploratory analysis and
released externally as a dual-purpose tool for both exploration and
explanation. Bell says the company will produce and publish similar
visualizations in the future.
Complex visualizations such as the MasterCard Mobile Payments
Readiness Index can require teams of data scientists, software engi‐
neers, marketers, and business leaders. Most organizations do not have
the resources necessary to create visualizations at that level. But if the
demand for Hollywood-grade data visualizations rises, enterprising
vendors will doubtlessly step into the breach with affordable solutions.
Challenges, Perils, and Pitfalls
In addition to offering a variety of technical challenges, data visuali‐
zation presents a mixed bag of moral and ethical dilemmas. “First, it
is far too easy to take data out of context and represent it in a dishonest
way,” says Scott Murray. “Second, humans are far too trusting of visual
images! If a chart looks halfway respectable, people will interpret it as
unquestionable ‘fact.’ People who work with data know the reality is
much messier and more open to interpretation. Where did the original
data values come from? Who recorded them, and how? Is the source
trustworthy? What is the source’s motivation and intent in sharing this
data? What is the intent of the visual designer? What is the designer
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling 
| 
11

--- PAGE 18 ---
trying to persuade me to do or think?” Murray suggests that society
needs “a cultural push toward data literacy that encourages citizens to
be critical of data-images and to question their sources.”
There is also the danger of data visualizations becoming a form of
decoration. “There’s always a temptation to produce something su‐
perficially beautiful or impressive but lacking insight,” says Mike Bo‐
stock.
Jerzy Wieczorek, a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Statistics at
Carnegie Mellon University, spent several years at the US Census Bu‐
reau as a mathematical statistician. He warns against “using the wrong
tool for the job” simply because it seems the easiest choice. For exam‐
ple, if your dataset includes the names of countries, it might be tempt‐
ing to plot the data on an international map. “But a bar chart might be
the better choice, since it’s easier to compare the heights of two bars
than the color-intensities of two filled-in areas on a map,” says Wiec‐
zorek.
Figure 2. Image courtesy of the Gapminder Foundation.
For example, Gapminder’s visualization showing relationships be‐
tween income and life expectancy is essentially a scatterplot. As Wiec‐
zorek notes, “This scatterplot is much richer and more informative
than a shaded map (which would have been a patchwork of hard-to-
12 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 19 ---
2. Mike Bostock created the initial prototype of D3 while on leave of absence from Stan‐
ford. According to Bostock, Jason Davies subsequently became D3’s coauthor and
maintainer and contributed significant parts of D3’s functionality, such as the geo‐
graphic projection pipeline.
compare colors). Here, you see immediately which countries are above
or below average on either variable.”
Figure 3. “Small multiples” facilitate comparison between and within
groups. These back-to-back bar charts efficiently relate 714 numbers
(17 degree fields, by 2 genders, across 21 years) about bachelor’s de‐
grees earned in the US. Image courtesy of Jerzy Wieczorek.
Jeffrey Heer is a cofounder and CXO (Chief Experience Officer) at
Trifacta. He is also a professor of Computer Science at the University
of Washington, where he leads the Interactive Data Lab. Previously,
he led the Stanford Visualization Group. Members of the group created
a number of popular tools, including D3.js (Data-Driven Docu‐
ments)2 and Data Wrangler. Heer says that finding the right data and
making sure that it is properly structured for visualization is critical.
“It is surprisingly easy to overlook the immense amount of work that
goes into preparing data for analysis,” he says. “Visualization alone is
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling 
| 
13

--- PAGE 20 ---
not a magic bullet. For example, owning a hammer does not make you
a master carpenter—though it certainly helps you be better at it. Sim‐
ilarly, effective visualization arises through the combination of tools
and skilled use. Some amount of automation (e.g., automatic presen‐
tation methods) can help, but a thoughtful (and skeptical) analyst with
driving questions is essential.”
Worth a Thousand Words?
“Visualization is an extremely powerful tool. We all know a picture is
worth a thousand words—it’s all true,” says Ofer Mendelevitch of Hor‐
tonworks. “When you’ve got a good visualization, people get it right
away and you get a conversation going. You get feedback. It accelerates
productivity. It’s far better than talking on the phone or sending an
email. You instantly convey the same idea to many minds.”
But there’s a flipside. “If you bring the wrong visualization, then a lot
of bad things can happen.” Finding the right ways of conveying infor‐
mation to an audience can be as important as the information itself,
says Mendelevitch. “You need to find the best combination of techni‐
ques to create visualizations that inspire a wonderful flow of produc‐
tivity.” Resist the urge to show off, he says. “A lot of times as a data
scientist, you tend to think, ‘Wow, this is cool stuff!’ Cool is okay, but
you really have to think it through. Who is your audience? What is
their level of attention? What are you trying to convey? Which tools
will do the best job of conveying the message?”
A Range of Techniques for Visualizing Data
Hadley Wickham is Chief Scientist at RStudio and an adjunct assistant
professor at Rice University. He builds tools (both computational and
cognitive) that make data preparation, visualization, and analysis eas‐
ier. His contributions to R include over 30 R packages for data analysis
(ggplot2, plyr, reshape), making frustrating parts of R easier to use
(lubridate for dates, stringr for strings, httr for accessing web APIs),
and streamlining the R package development process (roxygen2, test‐
that, devtools, profr, staticdocs).
“One of the hardest parts of visualization is getting the data in the right
form. A lot of analysts spend 80 percent of their time just getting the
data ready to analyze,” says Wickham. “When I was a student, I thought
14 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 21 ---
it would be wonderful to get hired by a company with a great database
where all the data was beautiful, clean, and correct.”
The reality, says Wickham, is that most data is messy and disorganized.
“So your first step is usually tidying up the data. When you’ve got it
cleaned up and in the right form, then you can begin applying your
visualization tools,” he says. You are much more likely to uncover hid‐
den nuggets of useful insight in visualizations that are built on a foun‐
dation of clean data, he says.
“The goal is asking a precise question that can be answered with an
algorithm. Visualizations help you refine your question. When you
can answer your question with a number or with a handful of numbers,
then you have a model.” He continues, “Some people like to model first
and then visualize. I like to visualize first, and then model.”
Wickham says that he generally works in R “because R currently has
the best tools.” He begins by tidying up the data with reshape 2. Then
he puts in the data into ggplot2, his tool for visualization. “The goal of
ggplot2 is to declare how your data should map to things in the visu‐
alization, and then ggplot2 goes away and generates that plot,” he ex‐
plains. Last, he feeds the data into plyr, which is a tool (or set of tools)
for splitting big data into manageable pieces. “Plyr makes it easier to
express common data manipulation operations (e.g., selecting vari‐
ables, selecting rows, rearranging rows, adding new variables and
summarizing data from multiple values to a single value).”
At the other end of the visualization spectrum is Microsoft, which
made a strategic decision four years ago to “double down” on self-
service visualization tools. Rather than reinvent the wheel, Microsoft
decided to embed the newer tools within Excel. “Our users were telling
us they didn’t want to learn new tools, and so the obvious answer was
integrating self-service visualization capabilities into Excel,” says Her‐
ain Oberoi, a director of product management at Microsoft. “We made
a conscious decision to funnel innovation and new capabilities, in‐
cluding R&D efforts from our Microsoft Research Group, into Excel.
There was a huge effort behind this. You can see it not just in terms of
the next version of Excel, but also in Power Map, which is a 3D geo‐
spatial visualization tool that lets you literally ‘fly through’ the data.”
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling 
| 
15

--- PAGE 22 ---
Figure 4. 3D visualization overlays bar charts and a map to show ca‐
pacity by source across the United States.
Oberoi has no argument with Hadley Wickham’s observation that
most of the hard work of data visualization involves cleaning and ti‐
dying up messy datasets. “Visualization is the tip of the iceberg,” says
Oberoi. “You have to do a ton of work behind the scenes.” The main
difference between their approaches is that Microsoft, characteristi‐
cally, is happy to provide a black box for users without Jedi-level data-
wrangling skills.
“The reason we’re offering those capabilities is because our customers
are telling us that they want to do their own data visualizations,” says
Oberoi. “When you get into nonrelational data sources like Hadoop,
it becomes even more important to have tools for formatting, mas‐
saging, and cleaning data so you can do visualizations against it. It’s
the old story of garbage in, garbage out. You can have a great visuali‐
zation, but it can be completely misleading if the data was bad or dirty.
That’s not a sexy part of data visualization, but it’s a big deal and it’s
very important.”
16 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 23 ---
Going Mainstream?
As data visualization becomes less of an esoteric art and more of a do-
it-yourself process, it’s likely that more of us will begin incorporating
homemade charts and graphics into our daily communications. It cer‐
tainly seems as though data visualization has already become an es‐
sential part of nonfiction storytelling.
Will data visualization transform modern culture, perhaps the same
way that mathematics transformed science during the Renaissance?
Or will data visualization become increasingly baroque and exotic?
Nathan Yau compares data visualization to the written word. Like
Iliinsky, he believes there are rules for data visualization, but the rules
“aren’t dictated by design or statistics.” He writes, “Rather they are
governed by human perception, and they ensure accuracy when read‐
ers interpret encoded data.”
There is, of course, a danger inherent in visualizing data. When data
is transformed into a visual image, it is no longer data—it becomes
something else. Visualized data is not an abstraction; it has form, di‐
mension, and various qualities. Visualizing data is like breathing life
into dust—it’s an act of creation. In the wrong hands, data visualiza‐
tions can become tools of propaganda.
In his brilliant book, Thinking, Fast and Slow (Farrar, Straus and Giro‐
ux), Nobel laureate Daniel Kahneman describes two kinds of thought
processes: System 1, which relies on intuition and produces snap
judgments, and System 2, which relies on deliberative analysis and
produces what most of us would refer to as “well-reasoned” judgment.
Data visualizations, it seems, are perfect for System 1 scenarios, since
they allow us to see the “big picture” instantly and draw conclusions
very rapidly.
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling 
| 
17

--- PAGE 24 ---
But if data science is about careful analysis—precisely the kind of slow
rumination that characterizes System 2 thinking—isn’t the whole idea
of visualizing data something of a cheat? Raw data demands our full
attention, while visualized data requires only a passing glance. Is that
a good thing, or a bad thing? It probably depends on where you sit. If
you’re a data scientist, raw data is like raw vegetables—you might not
love them, but you know that you need them. If you’re a more casual
consumer of data, a good visualization is like a take-out gourmet meal
—it satisfies your appetite and doesn’t require hours of your time to
prepare.
18 
| 
Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling

--- PAGE 25 ---
About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has represented major organizations in numerous indus‐
tries.
Mike is coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media
Strategy (Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The Future of IT
Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers (Wiley, 2007). He
is also the writer of many articles, reports, and white papers on mar‐
keting strategy, marketing automation, customer intelligence, busi‐
ness performance management, collaborative social networking,
cloud computing, and big data analytics.
Over the course of a long career, Mike was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns ap‐
peared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald , Newsday, and other major US dailies.
Mike is a graduate of Hamilton College. He is a licensed private pilot,
an avid reader, and an enthusiastic ice hockey fan. Mike lives in Fair‐
field, Connecticut, with his wife and two children.

