--- PAGE 1 ---
THE DATA ANALYTICS
HANDBOOK
DATA ANALYSTS + DATA SCIENTISTS

--- PAGE 2 ---
1
ABOUT 
THE AUTHORS
BRIAN LIOU Content
Brian graduated from Cal with simultaneous degrees 
in Business Administration at the Haas School of 
Business and Statistics with an emphasis in Computer 
Science. He 
previously 
worked 
in 
investment 
banking before he transitioned into Data Analytics 
at MightyHive, an advertising technology company 
backed by Andreessen Horowitz.
TRISTAN TAO Content
Tristan holds dual degrees in Computer Science and 
Statistics from UC Berkeley (‘14). He first began 
working as a quantitative technical data analyst at 
Starmine (Thomson Reuters). From there he worked 
as a software engineer at Splunk. He has experience 
working with various Machine Learning models, NLP, 
Hadoop/Hive, Storm, R, Python and Java.
ELIZABETH LIN Design
Elizabeth is in her third year studying Computer 
Science at Cal with a focus in design. She is President of 
Innovative Design, a student group of visual designers 
and photographers, and Layout Director for BARE 
Magazine, Cal’s fashion and arts publication. She has 
interned at LinkedIn, TechValidate, and UC Berkeley’s 
EECS Department. She will be a Product Design Intern 
at Khan Academy this summer.

--- PAGE 3 ---
W
hat exactly do the sexy “Data Scientists” do? We start 
with this simple question. What other professions are 
there in Big Data? What tools do they use to accomplish their 
tasks? How can I enter the industry if I don’t have a Ph.D. in 
Statistics? The genesis of “The Data Analytics Handbook” 
stems from our own internal frustrations with these questions; 
as recent graduates of UC Berkeley (Go Bears!) in statistics, 
we saw a burgeoning industry craving curious minds but 
disconnected from its potential employees because of a lack 
of understanding of what the Data Analytics industry is and of 
what it requires. And so, we set out to discover the answers for 
ourselves by reaching out to industry leaders, academics, and 
professionals.
This handbook is the first of three parts and will focus on the 
experiences of current data analysts and data scientists. What 
we discovered in our research is that while each interviewee’s 
response was highly informative, their knowledge was 
fundamentally incomplete; the truth is that the Big Data 
industry is still so nascent that there is no singular definition 
of a data scientist or data analyst. In fact, the two terms are 
often used interchangeably.
While we continue to ponder the big questions surrounding 
Big Data, we believe that our research has shone light in an area 
unexplored, making our interviews that much more valuable 
to you. The firsthand experiences of those in the trenches, 
those leading the troops, and those crazy Ph.Ds, have not been 
shared until now.  We hope you enjoy reading the interviews as 
much as we enjoyed conducting them!
2
From Tristan, Brian, & Elizabeth

--- PAGE 4 ---
TOP 5 TAKEAWAYS
FROM THE DATA ANALYSTS & DATA SCIENTISTS
1. Communication skills are underrated
If you can’t present your analysis into digestible concepts for your CEO to 
understand, your analysis is only useful to yourself.
2. The biggest challenge for a data analyst isn’t modeling, it’s 
cleaning and collecting
Data analysts spend most of their time collecting and cleaning the data required 
for analysis. Answering questions like “where do you collect the data?”, “how 
do you collect the data?”, and “how should you clean the data?”, require much 
more time than the actual analysis itself.
3. A Data Scientist is better at statistics than a software engineer 
and better at software engineering than a statistician
The greatest difference between a data scientist and a data analyst is the 
understanding of computer science and conducting analysis with data at scale. 
That being said, data scientists only need a basic competency in statistics and 
computer science. Not all data scientists are Ph.D.’s, and newly developed 
tools are empowering more and more people to be able to do data science.
4. The data industry is still nascent, if you want to work with a 
variety of stakeholders in a more freeform role, the time to do so is 
now. 
Data scientists and data analysts all say they interact with a many parts of the 
company from engineering to business intelligence to product managers. The 
roles of data scientists and data analysts are largely undefined and vary by your 
own skill set and the company’s needs.
5. Both roles require a curiosity about working with data, a quality 
more important than your technical abilities.
The ability to discover trends and patterns previously unseen is what truly 
makes you valuable. Having a curiosity enables you to ask the creative questions 
necessary for transcendent analysis. As practice, when given a dataset, ask 
yourself what questions do you have about the data and how would you answer 
them?
3

--- PAGE 5 ---
4
05
08
13
16
20
23
27
ABRAHAM CABANGBANG
JOSH WILLS
BEN BREGMAN
LEON RUDYAK
PETER HARRINGTON
JOHN YEUNG
SANTIAGO CORTES
LINKEDIN
CLOUDERA
FACEBOOK
YELP
HG DATA
FLURRY
HG DATA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

--- PAGE 6 ---
5
ABRAHAM CABANGBANG
DATA SCIENTIST AT LINKEDIN
ABRAHAM graduated from Stanford University with a Bachelors and Masters 
in Chemical Engineering. He is currently part of a decision sciences/insights 
team focusing on data quality and cross product analysis at LinkedIn
LINKEDIN connects the world’s professionals to make them more productive 
and successful

--- PAGE 7 ---
6
What is your background and how did you end up at LinkedIn 
doing Data Science?
I graduated with a B.S. and M.S. in Chemical Engineering in 2011. After that I 
started working for a digital advertising platform as a data analyst and about 
year ago started at LinkedIn.
So how did you develop the skills to become a data scientist at 
LinkedIn if you studied chemical engineering?
I learned some statistics through my degree’s coursework, but most of it was 
from working as a data analyst before I began at LinkedIn. I picked up SQL 
pretty quickly at my previous job and used a fair amount of R. At LinkedIn I 
have learned Pig and Hadoop.
How would you define the role of a data analyst and how would 
you define the role of a data scientist?
It’s definitely a gray area. At my previous company I did both analyst and 
scientist jobs and as an analyst we were more customer facing; the tasks we 
did were directly related to the tangible business needs—what the customers 
wanted/requested. It was very directed. The scientist role is a little more free 
form. The first thing I did as a data scientist is work on building out internal 
dashboards, basically surfacing information that we were tracking on the back 
end, but weren’t being used by the data analysts for any reasons; for example, 
we might have lacked the infrastructure to display it, or the data was just not 
very well processed. It really wasn’t anything tailored out from a customer 
need, but came from what I noticed the analyst team needed in order to do 
their job.
Going into your role at LinkedIn, what are aspects of the job you 
and enjoy and what are aspects that you find frustrating?
One thing I enjoy is that the team at LinkedIn is so big that I have to work with 
a lot of different teams to get things done. My work involves working with PMs 
(product managers), the BI team, data services, and other data scientists so it’s 
a very open role where you do a lot of different things. As for something I don’t 
like, there isn’t a major thing that comes to mind.
What are some of the characteristics that differentiate data 
scientists from each other to be more effective?

--- PAGE 8 ---
7
I don’t think a data scientist at LinkedIn doesn’t mean one thing, we all have a 
baseline set of skills, and apart from that it’s pretty project specific. Some data 
scientists specialize in machine learning, others specialize in visualizations, 
but they are all effective data scientists.
How important do you think having a background in Statistics is?
It’s important, but it really depends on the project you’re working on. You can 
be a great data scientist without being an expert statistician. The skills you 
bring to the table kind of define the projects you do at LinkedIn.
What are the tools you use in your job?
I use SQL, Pig, and Hive regularly. I use R for visualizations or predictive 
modeling. I have used Micro Strategy and Tableau as well.
Can you describe a typical day and a typical project you might 
work on?
Since I work on a team that focuses on reporting and data quality, if there is 
a new product out there we might want to incorporate that into one of our 
major dashboards so that will involve working first with product mangers to 
work out what is important to the product, engineers to make sure the relevant 
data is being tracked, and then working with our data services team to do ETLs 
(extract, transform, and load) and visualizations.
Could you breakdown the percentages of how much time you 
spend coding, meetings, etc.?
A third to a half of my time coding, a quarter to a third meeting with the various 
parties, and the rest of the time split between data visualizations and other 
tasks.
What advice can you give to aspiring young professionals trying to 
enter the field?
I would start thinking about what questions you would ask about data and also 
what data would you want after using certain products. That would be a good 
way to start. A lot of the technical stuff can be learned. What is important is 
knowing how to ask the right questions and knowing how to go about answering 
them.

--- PAGE 9 ---
8
JOSH WILLS
SENIOR DIRECTOR OF DATA SCIENCE AT CLOUDERA
JOSH holds a degree in Mathematics from Duke University as well as an M.S.E. 
in Operations Research from UT Austin. Before coming to Cloudera, he worked 
as a software engineer as well as a statistician at companies including Google, 
Zilliant, and IBM. He is also the founder of Apache Crunch. 
CLOUDERA is revolutionizing enterprise data management by offering the 
first unified Platform for Big Data, an enterprise data hub built on Apache 
Hadoop™

--- PAGE 10 ---
Can you describe your background?
I studied math at Duke University. During most of college, I thought that I 
would become a math professor of some sort. I took a couple of probability 
courses, but didn’t take any statistics until my last semester at Duke, but I 
ended up falling in love with it. I minored in philosophy, and statistics felt like 
quantitative epistemology; given some data, what conclusions can we draw? 
What can we say that we know?
On the computer science side, I spent a couple of summers at Carnegie Mellon 
building brain simulations in MATLAB. After college, I went to IBM in Austin, 
Texas and worked on low-level system processing in C++. I got pretty bored, 
so I started working on a master’s in operations research at UT Austin, and 
then I went on to work at a couple of different startups- Zilliant, OneSpot, and 
Indeed- sometimes as a data analyst and sometimes as a software engineer. 
During my brief stint at Indeed, I became really interested in ad auctions and 
started reading all of this auction theory stuff, but I felt like I didn’t really know 
what I was doing, and I wanted to learn how auctions worked in the real world, 
which led me to Google.
I was hired at Google as a statistician, but as soon as I got in the door, all I 
did was write code and run experiments on the core auction module. After nine 
months of that, I made a lateral move over to Google’s software engineering 
ladder, and ended up working on things like logging systems, recommendation 
engines, and Google’s multivariate experiment framework. After that, I headed 
to Cloudera to become their first Director of Data Science, the first time I had 
“data science” as part of my job title. In summary, I moved between data 
analyst and software engineering roles during my entire career. I’d say that I 
was a data scientist the entire time, there just wasn’t a term for it yet.
You indicate that data science does not have a structured way of 
learning, for example you did not have a PhD in statistics. How did 
you learn the formal skills required to create defensible statistical 
analyses?
Everything boils down to understanding the fundamentals. In addition to the 
core of statistics, reasoning probabilistically and understanding conditional 
probability are really important. I think the same thing is true for computer 
science; understanding data structures and computational complexity is 
fundamental. Once you understand them it makes moving in a new direction 
9

--- PAGE 11 ---
or exploring a new problem relatively easy. It is a little bit trivial to say it, but if 
you have a good understanding of the fundamentals, then that’s all you really 
need.
What is your definition of a data scientist?
“Someone better at statistics than any software engineer, and someone better 
at software engineering than any statistician.” The vast majority of statisticians 
can write code, or rather they think they can write code in SAS, or R, or Python. 
However, it is usually really bad code that is only intended to be used by the 
person who wrote it. I think that what makes you a good software engineer 
is the ability to write code for other people. To be good at coding you must 
understand how other people are going to use it. Statisticians don’t always 
have that inherent skill.
On the other hand, software engineers conceptually understand models 
such as linear regression, but they don’t really understand the underlying 
assumptions of statistical modeling. They think that they are doing data 
analysis and finding insights, but what they’re finding is nonsense, or at 
least not what they think they’re finding. It’s easy to make this mistake and 
think you’re doing analysis by just applying statistical models to data without 
understanding the assumptions.
The funny thing is, people who don’t know anything about statistics or data 
analysis typically do the right thing- they look at the data. Novices will put 
data into a spreadsheet, look at it, and make some basic plots and charts. 
People who learn about t-tests and regression get a little sophisticated, and 
start applying models without looking at the data. They think that they can 
just apply this technique and they don’t have to look at the data anymore. You 
do that a few times, you get burned by some bad data, and you learn to go back 
and start looking at the data again.
How would you define the role of a data analyst?
When I was a data analyst, I spent most of my time working in Excel and R. The 
volume and structure of the data was not too extreme or unusual, so whether 
the algorithm I was running was linear or O(N^2) did not matter. I think the 
transition into a data scientist happens when the data cleansing process or 
the volume of the data becomes so extreme that you need to worry about the 
computational complexity of your algorithms in order to get an answer in a 
10

--- PAGE 12 ---
reasonable time frame. So the line between data analyst and data scientist is 
when an understanding of computer science makes you much, much better at 
your job.
Per your answer, I argue that there are companies such as BigML 
that are creating a layer of abstraction, so that analysts don’t need 
to understand the software engineering portion of the job. Do you 
think the emergence of such tools will move data analysts into 
data scientists?
Great question. I think, that as servers get bigger and we gain access to 
cloud systems like BigML, the size of problems that data analysts can tackle 
will continue to increase. That being said, the richness, the volume, and the 
complexity of the data that we are collecting is also increasing at a healthy 
rate. So, I don’t really worry about the future of data scientists or data analysts; 
there is plenty of data and plenty of problems for everybody to work on.
You mentioned the shortage of data analysts and data scientists. 
Where do you think the next generation of these people will come 
from, given that academia is not fully preparing graduates?
It’s a great question, and I wish I had a simple answer for you. If we go back to 
our definition of data scientists, we can talk about the two key skill shortages. 
Obviously, we already have a shortage of software engineers. But beyond that, 
we also have a shortage of people who are statistically literate. This is true 
across the board, from managers to analysts to software engineers. What 
makes the data scientist shortage so acute is that it exists at the intersection 
of both of these shortages.
I’m inclined to believe that there is a contingent of software engineers like 
myself, who studied math in college, and who will take on more and more 
data science positions. I can’t solve the problem of creating more software 
engineers. However, I would like to work on solving the problem by making 
people more statistically literate. I’ve toyed on and off about putting together 
a short course for software engineers on how to think like a statistician.
With the emergence of Big Data technologies, it seems like 
everyday someone else is coming out with a new tool. How 
important would you say it is to be up to date with all of these 
tools in order to work within the industry?
11

--- PAGE 13 ---
Again, I would bring it back around to the fundamentals. The thing to understand 
about “Big Data stuff,” is that it’s driven by economics. Specifically, it is the 
fact that disk has gotten insanely cheap. The cost vs. performance of the disk is 
falling faster than Moore’s Law. All computer systems have a mix of resources, 
primarily network bandwidth, CPU, memory, and disk. For a long time, every 
one of these resources was scarce, and so we designed systems to use each 
of them as carefully as possible. Now we are in a mode where disk is really 
cheap, CPUs are great, memory is getting cheaper all the time, and network 
bandwidth is the primary bottleneck for almost everything interesting that we 
want to do. When you talk about new Big Data technologies, it’s important to 
point out that the ideas behind things like MapReduce and Spark are not new. 
It is just that the economics of storage have shifted so that these architectures 
make economic sense in a way that they really didn’t before.
I think that over time, we will teach MapReduce in the same way that we 
teach bubble sort. It’s a very simple way to think about distributed computing 
that is elementary and accessible to everyone. If you can think in MapReduce, 
it prepares you to be able to think in Spark. Spark is a faster, more optimized 
model, but it’s still fundamentally similar to MapReduce. Ultimately, we really 
want people to develop the MapReduce-style of thinking about computations.
The only way that we won’t need MapReduce-style thinking is if we make 
some kind of advancement in networking technology that would enable huge 
clusters of machines to act as a single machine. When and if that happens, it 
will blow away all of this stuff. If having a machine in LA and communicating 
with another machine in New York was virtually instantaneous, then there is 
no need for a distinction between a data analyst and a data scientist. As long 
as that gap exists, we will need people with the ability to think in computer 
science terms when approaching analytical problems.
12

--- PAGE 14 ---
13
BEN BREGMAN
PRODUCT ANALYST AT FACEBOOK
BEN graduated in 2011 from Stanford with degrees in math and physics. After 
graduation, Ben spent time traveling and working at a trading firm before 
joining Facebook in 2013. He currently works as a Product Analyst at Facebook.
FACEBOOK’S mission is to give people the power to share and make the world 
more open and connected. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
14
What is your role as a data analyst at Facebook? 
I use data to help drive product development. At Facebook, product teams are 
generally composed of some mix of product managers, designers, engineers, 
and data analysts. The analyst’s role is to bring a data-driven perspective to 
the conversation. This might include understanding who is using our product, 
what value users are deriving from our product, and where we should go next. 
We then work directly with the PMs, designers, and engineers to make sure 
the team is prioritizing and moving as effectively as possible to hit those goals. 
What are the tools you use most at Facebook? 
One philosophy at Facebook is that if you need something, then build it! To 
that end, members of the analytics team have created some awesome tools to 
facilitate analysis of our data, including real-time monitoring tools and fast 
analysis tools for easy deep dives into data. We use Python to write scheduled 
analysis scripts, HiveQL to query the data itself, and R for statistical analysis. 
Finally, we have a few in-house visualization tools that we use to effectively 
aggregate and disseminate data information through the org. 
How would you differentiate your position from a data scientist? 
From what I’ve seen, the mapping of title to job function differs company 
by company and team by team. In general, I perform 3 functions: 1) setting 
up and debugging logging infrastructure in our core code bases, 2) setting up 
downstream processes for analysis of the data, and 3) using the results to build 
a story and sync up with the rest of our team on the state and future of our 
product. The first two functions probably line up most closely with the typical 
image of a “data scientist,” while the third function speaks more directly to 
the product analyst’s role as a key member of the product development team. 
Do you see applications for your job in industries other than 
technology? Which ones? 
The process of using large data sets to understand the value that people are 
deriving from our product lends itself most naturally to the technology industry. 
At the end of the day, this kind of information is useful to any company that 
wants to get feedback from its users about where to grow and develop. For 
example, that is why Facebook has developed tools like Page Insights, which 
allows business owners to understand who is visiting and interacting with 
their page on Facebook. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
15
Could you describe a typical day and a typical project you might 
work on? 
My typical day will vary depending on where we are in the lifecycle of a product 
release. If we are actively rolling out a new feature, I will be monitoring and 
digging into metrics to understand where we are under/outperforming. If we 
are developing a new feature, I will be working with engineers to ensure that our 
logging is up to par and communicates as expected with any backend services 
involved in the feature. If we are brainstorming future direction for a product, I 
will be pulling data and performing analyses that help inform the conversation. 
It’s awesome being involved in the product lifecycle from beginning to end, and 
great to see when users are really enjoying and benefiting from a new feature. 
How were you interviewed for the position? Programming 
questions? Statistics questions? 
I went through about 7 or 8 interviews end-to-end for this position. Technical 
aspects of the interviews included basic coding (data structure-type questions, 
any language), technical data analysis (how to extract and handle information 
from large data sets, included SQL), and general analytics (what questions to 
ask to learn about a product, some quick math during examples). The interviews 
also contained a strong focus on cultural fit, both for Facebook and for the 
Analytics org at Facebook.

--- PAGE 17 ---
16
LEON RUDYAK
BUSINESS INSIGHT ANALYST AT YELP
LEON is part of Yelp’s Business Insight team involved with driving strategic 
improvements in product, revenue operations and sales. He graduated from 
UC San Diego with a degree in Economics.
YELP operates an “online urban guide” and business review site.

--- PAGE 18 ---
17
Can you talk about your background; how did you end up 
working at Yelp and how did you end up specifically in data 
analytics?
I graduated as an Economics major in 2010, which was one of the worst years to 
graduate given the economy. I started working at an executive compensation 
research company where I went through a couple of different roles.  My work 
involved using SQL and sorting through large sets of financial data, which I 
really enjoyed.  However, I really wanted to apply my skills to the consumer 
internet space and Yelp was a great fit because I loved the product and they 
were looking for analysts comfortable with SQL and working with large data 
sets.
How long have you been with Yelp?
1 year and 3 months.
Can you talk about the aspects of the job you enjoy and aspects 
that are frustrating?
I enjoy the fact that my team gets insight into all aspects of Yelp’s business. At 
larger companies with large analytics teams, individual analysts usually only 
get exposed to specific parts of the business and don't really get to see the big 
picture. Yelp is a public company, but our BI team is only 5 people so we get to 
work on projects in product, sales, marketing and etc. A frustrating part of my 
job would be monthly reporting, which usually involves manual and repetitive 
work. We have to get through the reporting quickly to get to work on the cooler 
projects. 
Can you talk about a one specific project that is representative of 
your overall job role and also something you enjoyed at Yelp?
One of my favorite projects was analyzing how positive feedback on the site 
(likes or comments) influences user contribution on Yelp via writing reviews 
or posting photos. We did some testing with the community managers (people 
who interact with elite Yelp users) to see how their involvement affected user 
contributions. The analysis was very impactful and resulted in changes to both 
community operations and product. 
What kind of tools do you utilize to accomplish a project like the 
one you mentioned? Are you still heavily reliant on SQL? Do you 

--- PAGE 19 ---
18
have other tools that you’ve been using?
A big part of my job is tying together data from the different sources. Our main 
sources of information are the SQL database, Salesforce and some internal 
company tools and documents. In the project I mentioned earlier, I used SQL 
to get the raw data of user activity that I then synthesized in Excel to create 
charts and graphs.
How much Statistics do you use in your job? Do you think more 
statistical knowledge will help you in your work?
It is not necessary for what I do, but it definitely helps. We’ve done a couple 
of projects in R that involved linear regressions but it’s not something we do 
frequently. Mainly a background in statistics gives you a better feel for the data 
and helps you determine the validity of the results.
Can you talk about the workflow at Yelp, and how your role fits in?
My team reports to VP of Strategy and Operations. He presents us with the 
main problem we’re trying to solve for or some part of the business we are 
trying to explore more deeply. Then my manager provides the outline for what 
we need to do to solve the problem and the kind of outputs we need to show. 
My role is to pull and clean the data, create the analysis with expected outputs 
and transform the analysis into a digestible PowerPoint. Then we report back 
to our VP, who gives us feedback. We iterate if we need to.
What are some of the softer skills you need as a data analyst?
Communication is important. I know the term “effective communication” gets 
thrown around a lot, but I do think it’s very important for a data analyst. You 
need to be able to clearly communicate the methodology and results of your 
analysis to someone who isn’t involved with the data. When communicating 
over emails, you have to be very specific in the question you’re asking. Not 
communicating properly can easily start a wave of confusion. 
Do you have any advice for undergrads/young professionals 
entering the field? What advice would you give to someone 
looking to get a similar job as you?
I think new grads focus too much on what title they need to get instead of 
what experience will be the most valuable. In my opinion you should spend 
the early years of your career maximizing your learning opportunities and 

--- PAGE 20 ---
19
trying to surround yourself with people who are smarter than you.  I would also 
advise someone looking for an analyst position to get a “hard skill” (SQL, Excel 
modeling, Python, R). Everyone applying for analyst jobs has college degrees, 
but having a technical skill allows you to differentiate yourself tremendously.
How are you specifically interviewed at Yelp?
I had two phone interviews with the recruiter and my manager to gauge my 
interest in the position and see how much I knew about the company. I then 
had two onsite interviews with multiple people from my team, finance and 
engineering that involved Excel, SQL and critical thinking business problems. 
I also had a take home Excel project.

--- PAGE 21 ---
20
PETER HARRINGTON
CHIEF DATA SCIENTIST AT HG DATA
PETER is the author of Machine Learning in Action, a best selling book on the 
most important machine learning algorithms. He holds both a Bachelors of 
Science and a Masters degree in electrical engineering.
HG DATA indexes, extracts, and renders unstructured data to improve B2B 
technology sales and marketing programs.

--- PAGE 22 ---
21
How would you define the role of a data analyst? How would 
you define the role of a data scientist?
The short answer is that a data analyst doesn’t know how to code. A data analyst 
doesn’t know how to code but instead is expected to be proficient in industry 
tools such as Excel or if you say work in Finance a Bloomberg terminal. A data 
scientist definitely has a much higher understanding of computer science and 
is expected to develop tools on their own or put to use some non-standard 
tools for the products needs or the company’s needs.
In terms of skills what skills do you think a data analyst needs, 
do you think a skill like R will become the new baseline skill 
instead of Excel?
Yes I think so and I think it’s more because the tools are becoming easier to 
use than people are becoming smarter. We had a conversation the other day 
about this; the typical programmer ten years ago was a very nerdy person. A 
programmer today isn’t so stereotypically nerdy anymore. Now is this because 
programming has gotten cooler? Or because the tools have gotten easier and 
we think its because the tools have gotten easier. The greater accessibility of 
these tools will inevitably allow a larger audience to participate. 
In response to that, do you think the bar to become a data 
scientist is getting lower so that professionals without 
advanced degrees in Statistics or Computer Science can 
become one?
Companies right now ask for Ph.D.’s because up to now these techniques for 
applying machine learning and data mining in industry haven’t been well 
defined, but I think a lot of the techniques are becoming more standard and 
accessible for public use.
How does your company use data analytics as a comparative 
advantage?
HG Data does a lot of text analysis. We do a lot of modeling that is similar to 
how insurance providers use data analytics, an example for us would be: if this 
company does XYZ what is the likelihood that they will switch CRM (Customer 
Resource Management) providers. We index and aggregate that data so that 
enterprise sales professionals can be more efficient in their work.

--- PAGE 23 ---
22
How would you describe the data science work that you do?
We do some predictive analytics but we have found that a lot of the customers 
want to do the prediction on their own. We focus on natural language processing 
work. The predictive models we make have got to be super transparent and 
in most cases our clients have their own information they want to use. The 
biggest barrier we have found is when we create predictive models the client 
wants to understand under the hood what’s going on and without the expertise 
we have, they can’t understand it and thereby don’t trust it.
Could you describe a typical day or project in your role?
A typical project would be if we have found a new source of data but it’s not 
in the form that can be stored in our database. So we work to transform the 
data into the form we need. A student may think, “Oh, well you just have to 
reformat it.” But it’s not that easy because there are nondeterministic things 
that need to be done and needs to be done with high accuracy. Since we are a 
startup I actually probably spend 60% of my time coding, 5% I’m looking at 
results, and 35% I am researching new ways to fill in the gaps in my analysis.
How would you describe the value you and other data 
scientists bring to companies?
The value is making data driven decisions. It varies by industry how accurate 
or data based these decisions are going to be but in most cases it determines 
whether your company is profitable or un-profitable. I think what we do at HG 
Data will be the future for how all companies will operate and we already see 
sign of companies moving slowly towards that. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
23
JOHN YEUNG
DATA ANALYST AT FLURRY
JOHN is a Data Analyst at Flurry. He previously worked at Trial Pay and was a 
Surgical Research Associate at Stanford University
FLURRY is a market-leading analytics software for smartphone and tablet 
apps consumer behavior.

--- PAGE 25 ---
24
Can you talk about who you are, and how you ended up in the 
field of data analytics?
I studied Philosophy and Parasitology as an undergraduate. I more stumbled 
upon the field of data science. I was admitted to medical school, but I didn’t 
know if I wanted to commit to the schooling required to become a doctor. I 
eventually went into a business development ad operations role for another 
company. That’s where issues with Big Data came up, data that you couldn’t 
open up in Excel. I couldn’t do my job without being able to aggregate and 
crunch these numbers together quickly and it would take Excel hours. That’s 
also when SQL became the modern day Excel tool for analysts. From there I 
hopped onto Flurry during the mobile boom and I got a lot of exposure building 
predictive models in the advertising space.
So did you self-teach the programming and statistical 
knowledge you use now?
Yes, I had to learn R and SQL and you sort of self teach with online resources 
followed by professional training. I’d always recommend getting professional 
training to really solidify your foundation.
Have you considered doing a Masters program?
Yes, definitely. But right now the Mobile Analytics/Ad space is moving so fast 
that I don’t want to take a hiatus from work just yet.
Can you talk about the aspect of the job you enjoy, and the 
aspect of the job that are frustrating?
From a high level, I enjoy the problem-solving aspect of this field, and this 
actually goes into the frustrating part as well. Big Data and the technologies 
resulting from it are relatively recent. For the business side of things, the 
marketing people and acquisition managers or consultants, for them to extract 
meaningful data and insights means you have to have infrastructure in place to 
get this reporting. What Flurry does is provide analytics for developers so they 
can understand their users’ usage behavior better. Developers will include the 
Flurry SDK in their app, which in turn allows them to slice and dice the data of 
their users through our dashboard. Now extrapolate that across 450,000 apps, 
across 1.3 billion devices that we track on a monthly level. Processing that and 
deriving insights from that is what I do. The data is in petabytes. So Excel is 
useless here. To get answers to a simple question such as how many people 

--- PAGE 26 ---
actually went and made a purchase in your app might take hours or days to 
answer if you don’t have the proper infrastructure. To me the result of this has 
redefined the data analyst role and the impact they can have in a company.
What about the job of a data analyst most interests you? Is it the 
technical challenge or the non-technical challenges?
Personally, I think that the business insight aspect of the job is something I lean 
towards. It is more directly tied to revenue. Some advice I give to undergraduates 
is that it’s always good to be as closely tied to revenue as possible. Engineers 
will always be able to build and code better than you, but as analysts, being able 
to interpret the data and make recommendations on strategy is where you can 
contribute the most. Today, it’s difficult to really understand the business side 
of things without a good technical background and understanding of metrics 
and data.
Do you use any other tools other than R/SQL? 
That depends on whom you’re talking to in the company. We’re one of the 
biggest data companies; the amount of tools we can use is actually limited. The 
data is too big; therefore it’s difficult to plug in BI tools like Tableau. I still use 
Excel, because some things work well in Excel. I will use Python/Linux to splice 
raw data, remove 0s and clean. Then I load the data into SQL. From there, I do 
another layer of massaging and move to Excel or I do my calculations in SQL. 
It ends with making a power point slide deck so you can convey your ideas and 
discoveries. Some people are really good at data pulling/data mining, but can’t 
communicate the esoteric and crazy analysis to the CEO or the sales team. This 
is what separates the really good analysts from the rest.
Can you describe a typical day while working on a typical 
project?
Some of the interesting projects I’ve worked on include some of the largest 
gaming companies; we do one-off consulting projects for them. Generally a 
gaming company will have a portfolio of games, and they’re always looking 
to expand the user base or find there the industry is heading. So a lot of times 
they will turn to Flurry to get a sense of where the market is heading towards. 
One example is when there are different companies where they own different 
games, but the genre is rather concentrated. Now, if they want to acquire more 
users, they have to decide what investment will get them the best ROI. So, if a 
25

--- PAGE 27 ---
company is specializing in strategy games, they would try to figure out where 
overseas, is a good place to expand and acquire new users. We can look at users 
in those countries and see that people in those countries are over indexing in 
a specific game type. 
Where do you see other applications of the data analyst role 
outside of technology and gaming?
In mobile, there is a huge industry in shopping; that industry hasn’t been fully 
understood. Mobile shopping hasn’t successfully taken off by using analytics. 
There is also a huge opportunity in Biotechnology. The human genome project 
for example. Also you can look at manufacturing companies such as jet engine 
producers, the amount of data that a turbine produces per day is enormous 
and if you could improve engine efficiency for example that would be a huge 
impact.
If you were to interview a data analyst, what questions/skills 
would you ask and look for?
When I’m interviewing other candidates, I try to figure out what they know. 
I.E. on a scale of 1-10, how well do you know SQL? And this is a loaded question 
actually, because based on their response and given background, you can 
assess their competency, analytical ability, and how experienced they are. 
Many candidates will say they’re an 8, but I would say it is very rare to come 
across someone that is a real solid “8” since there are extremely limited 
environments out there that would give you the ability to become an 8. I also 
think it is preferable for someone to have a strong technical background, there 
is no need to know how to build apps or know how to code, but you’ll need 
some relevancy by being proficient in SQL, know python, or you have a good 
statistics background. But, if you’re a junior or 1-2 years out of school, there 
might not have been enough time for you to have that full spectrum to be fully 
developed in the data side and the business side. I’d probably pick one and 
focus on that side. Try to sell yourself on your ability and hunger to learn to 
increase your knowledge. You can be the greatest SQL guru, but if you are a 
poor communicator, and have no ability to extrapolate your work into business 
insight, you will hit a ceiling quicker than you expect.
26

--- PAGE 28 ---
27
SANTIAGO CORTEZ
SENIOR DATA ANALYST AT HG DATA
SANTIAGO is a senior data analyst at HG Data. He enjoys playing soccer in his 
free time.
HG DATA indexes, extracts, and renders unstructured data to fundamentally 
improve B2B technology sales and marketing programs.

--- PAGE 29 ---
28
Can you talk about your background and how you ended up 
working at HG Data?
I was going to school for Computer Science but to be honest I didn’t want to 
be in an office all day long. I was in Santa Barbara when I saw an ad for a job 
on Craigslist. I thought I had the skills needed for it so I applied. The company 
originally was a database for non-profit donor information. We indexed donor 
information into a searchable format. A non-profit would come to our company 
and seek out where the best donors are. Trying to use analytics to automate this 
process of collecting donor information is where it all started. I believe that our 
competition at the time was manually collecting pamphlet data and typing it 
into the computer, and our use of analytics gave us a step on the competition. 
Now that you’re in the industry, why are you passionate about 
it? Why you believe in Information Revolution? 
I believe it in because I’ve seen first hand how paying attention to patterns can 
have huge impact for a company. We identify and use patterns of strings that 
can help make our algorithms get smarter. The powerful thing is you can have 
a small team, yet if you correctly utilize the data, it enables you to do so much 
more than you ever could with a large team without the analytics. This is one 
aspect of the job that is different from the other ones I’ve seen. For example, 
let’s say we are looking for a particular Microsoft product. Using analytics we 
were able to extract multiple valuable data points from a document, rather than 
just the single piece of data we originally searched for.  We were able to find 
that certain strings of text contained keywords that had a tendency towards 
good hits, and others to bad.   This is an example of a small clue in the data that 
changed our overall process. Ultimately we were able to increase the value of 
our product. 
It seems like what you’re describing is an “Aha” moment with 
data. How frequently does that happen?
It definitely is great. Depending on the process we’re working on, these 
moments inevitably come up. You have a general map, and you want to get to 
a point. But along the path you find different ways you can add values to the 
end goal. It is a developing process. I don’t think we have ever had a method/
process that didn’t evolve; most things become completely different than what 
they were on day one. It is an ever-changing process. That is another cool part 

--- PAGE 30 ---
29
of the job. Since we’re a smaller company, we can change quickly. New ideas 
are sprouting everywhere. 
Can you then talk about what kind of skills/tools you use day-
to-day?
The skills I use the most is in-house proprietary software that we have. We 
don’t use too much outside technology. Besides maybe Microsoft Word or 
PDFs, most of tools are custom made by the engineering team. One of my main 
jobs is to refine some of the natural language processing related queries and 
overall quality control.
When you notice those things to change, do you prescribe 
things for the engineering team to edit the tools?
Yes, we have meetings and we talk about what we noticed. We come up with 
tools/ideas and we present them to the engineers. If we agree that there is 
enough values in it and we have the resources, it gets implemented.
What do you use to figure out these patterns? Excel and pivot 
tables?
Some of it is note taking. When you start seeing things, you write it down. 
If you see strings appear with frequency you write it down. It is about sifting 
through the data and either taking a mental note or writing it down. You try 
different searches and see what yields the best results. The real tool is the 
way we setup our Quality Control System, how we have people look at the data 
and our communication system to make judgment calls. We have an in-house 
handbook that we created that guides these judgment-calls because even if 
you see the trend, sometimes you’re not sure if you’re the only one seeing it. 
Having that open line of communication helps. 
What is your workflow? Does your team figure out the keyword 
and the engineering team implements the tools that gather 
intelligence based on your findings?
It sort of starts with an order for a technology. It starts with our research 
librarian. He determines the best keyword for information retrieval. Then it 
goes through QC. We then determine if the result is viable/valuable. Depending 
on the results it gets fed back into the QC for another iteration until we have 
the clean data we want.

--- PAGE 31 ---
What advice would you give to undergrads/young professionals 
looking to enter the data analytics field?
It is a huge/growing field. With my case, it was a leap of faith. I would say that it 
is a great field to get into, if you’re the type of person who wants to control the 
chessboard. If you like to see how different pieces move, you play around with 
different strategies and yet you love looking at the larger picture and use data 
as efficiently as possible. Especially with a smart startup (of course it varies 
from person to person, but my experience has been great), the excitement 
payoff is worth it for me.  The opportunity of the wild-west frontier aspect of 
it is very rewarding.
30

--- PAGE 32 ---
The Data Analytics Handbook:
CEOs + Managers edition
COMING SOON
with interviews from...
and many more!
CHECK OUT OUR BLOG AT
statsguys.wordpress.com
Mike Olson
Cloudera
Rohan Deuskar
Stylitics
Greg Lamp
Yhat

