--- PAGE 1 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 1 of 11 
 
Data Warehouse Concepts, Architecture and 
Components 
What is Data warehouse? 
Data warehouse is an information system that contains historical and commutative 
data from single or multiple sources. It simplifies reporting and analysis process of 
the organization. 
It is also a single version of truth for any company for decision making and 
forecasting. 
Characteristics of Data warehouse 
A data warehouse has following characteristics: 
• Subject-Oriented 
• Integrated 
• Time-variant 
• Non-volatile 
Subject-Oriented 
A data warehouse is subject oriented as it offers information regarding a theme 
instead of companies' ongoing operations. These subjects can be sales, marketing, 
distributions, etc. 
A data warehouse never focuses on the ongoing operations. Instead, it put 
emphasis on modeling and analysis of data for decision making. It also provides a 
simple and concise view around the specific subject by excluding data which not 
helpful to support the decision process. 
Integrated 
In Data Warehouse, integration means the establishment of a common unit of 
measure for all similar data from the dissimilar database. The data also needs to be 
stored in the Datawarehouse in common and universally acceptable manner. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 2 of 11 
 
A data warehouse is developed by integrating data from varied sources like a 
mainframe, relational databases, flat files, etc. Moreover, it must keep consistent 
naming conventions, format, and coding. 
This integration helps in effective analysis of data. Consistency in naming 
conventions, attribute measures, encoding structure etc. have to be ensured. 
Consider the following example: 
 
 
 
In the above example, there are three different application labeled A, B and C. 
Information stored in these applications are Gender, Date, and Balance. However, 
each application's data is stored different way. 
• In Application A gender field store logical values like M or F 
• In Application B gender field is a numerical value, 
• In Application C application, gender field stored in the form of a character  
•  
•  
• value. 
• Same is the case with Date and balance 
However, after transformation and cleaning process all this data is stored in 
common format in the Data Warehouse. 
Time-Variant 
The time horizon for data warehouse is quite extensive compared with operational 
systems. The data collected in a data warehouse is recognized with a particular 
period and offers information from the historical point of view. It contains an 
element of time, explicitly or implicitly. 
One such place where Datawarehouse data display time variance is in in the 
structure of the record key. Every primary key contained with the DW should have 
either implicitly or explicitly an element of time. Like the day, week month, etc. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 3 of 11 
 
Another aspect of time variance is that once data is inserted in the warehouse, it 
can't be updated or changed. 
Non-volatile 
Data warehouse is also non-volatile means the previous data is not erased when 
new data is entered in it. 
Data is read-only and periodically refreshed. This also helps to analyze historical 
data and understand what & when happened. It does not require transaction 
process, recovery and concurrency control mechanisms. 
Activities like delete, update, and insert which are performed in an operational 
application environment are omitted in Data warehouse environment. Only two 
types of data operations performed in the Data Warehousing are 
1. Data loading 
2. Data access 
Here, are some major differences between Application and Data Warehouse 
Operational Application 
Data Warehouse 
Complex program must be coded to make sure 
that data upgrade processes maintain high 
integrity of the final product. 
This kind of issues does not happen because 
data update is not performed. 
Data is placed in a normalized form to ensure 
minimal redundancy. 
Data is not stored in normalized form. 
Technology needed to support issues of 
transactions, data recovery, rollback, and 
resolution as its deadlock is quite complex. 
It offers relative simplicity in technology. 
Data Warehouse Architectures 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 4 of 11 
 
There are mainly three types of Datawarehouse Architectures: - 
Single-tier architecture 
The objective of a single layer is to minimize the amount of data stored. This goal is 
to remove data redundancy. This architecture is not frequently used in practice. 
Two-tier architecture 
Two-layer architecture separates physically available sources and data warehouse. 
This architecture is not expandable and also not supporting a large number of end-
users. It also has connectivity problems because of network limitations. 
Three-tier architecture 
This is the most widely used architecture. 
It consists of the Top, Middle and Bottom Tier. 
1. Bottom Tier: The database of the Datawarehouse servers as the bottom tier. 
It is usually a relational database system. Data is cleansed, transformed, and 
loaded into this layer using back-end tools. 
2. Middle Tier: The middle tier in Data warehouse is an OLAP server which is 
implemented using either ROLAP or MOLAP model. For a user, this 
application tier presents an abstracted view of the database. This layer also 
acts as a mediator between the end-user and the database. 
3. Top-Tier: The top tier is a front-end client layer. Top tier is the tools and API 
that you connect and get data out from the data warehouse. It could be 
Query tools, reporting tools, managed query tools, Analysis tools and Data 
mining tools. 
 
 
 
Datawarehouse Components 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
 
 
The data warehouse is based on an RDBMS server which is a central information 
repository that is surrounded by some key components to make the entire 
environment functional, manageable and accessible 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are mainly five components of Data Warehouse: 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 6 of 11 
 
Data Warehouse Database 
The central database is the foundation of the data warehousing environment. This 
database is implemented on the RDBMS technology. Although, this kind of 
implementation is constrained by the fact that traditional RDBMS system is 
optimized for transactional database processing and not for data warehousing. For 
instance, ad-hoc query, multi-table joins, aggregates are resource intensive and  
slow down performance. 
Hence, alternative approaches to Database are used as listed below- 
• In a Datawarehouse, relational databases are deployed in parallel to allow 
for scalability. Parallel relational databases also allow shared memory or 
shared nothing model on various multiprocessor configurations or massively 
parallel processors. 
• New index structures are used to bypass relational table scan and improve 
speed. 
• Use of multidimensional database (MDDBs) to overcome any limitations 
which are placed because of the relational data model. Example: Essbase 
from Oracle. 
Sourcing, Acquisition, Clean-up and Transformation Tools (ETL) 
The data sourcing, transformation, and migration tools are used for performing all 
the conversions, summarizations, and all the changes needed to transform data 
into a unified format in the Datawarehouse. They are also called Extract, Transform 
and Load (ETL) Tools. 
Their functionality includes: 
• Anonymize data as per regulatory stipulations. 
• Eliminating unwanted data in operational databases from loading into Data 
warehouse. 
• Search and replace common names and definitions for data arriving from 
different sources. 
• Calculating summaries and derived data 
• In case of missing data, populate them with defaults. 
• De-duplicated repeated data arriving from multiple data sources. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 7 of 11 
 
These Extract, Transform, and Load tools may generate cron jobs, background 
jobs, Cobol programs, shell scripts, etc. that regularly update data in 
Datawarehouse. These tools are also helpful to maintain the Metadata. 
These ETL Tools have to deal with challenges of Database & Data heterogeneity. 
Metadata 
The name Meta Data suggests some high- level technological concept. However, it 
is quite simple. Metadata is data about data which defines the data warehouse. It is 
used for building, maintaining and managing the data warehouse. 
In the Data Warehouse Architecture, meta-data plays an important role as it 
specifies the source, usage, values, and features of data warehouse data. It also 
defines how data can be changed and processed. It is closely connected to the data 
warehouse. 
For example, a line in sales database may contain: 
4030 KJ732 299.90 
This is a meaningless data until we consult the Meta that tell us it was 
• Model number: 4030 
• Sales Agent ID: KJ732 
• Total sales amount of $2999.90 
Therefore, Meta Data are essential ingredients in the transformation of data into 
knowledge. 
Metadata helps to answer the following questions 
• What tables, attributes, and keys does the Data Warehouse contain? 
• Where did the data come from? 
• How many times do data get reloaded? 
• What transformations were applied with cleansing? 
Metadata can be classified into following categories: 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 8 of 11 
 
1. Technical Meta Data: This kind of Metadata contains information about 
warehouse which is used by Data warehouse designers and administrators. 
2. Business Meta Data: This kind of Metadata contains detail that gives end-
users a way easy to understand information stored in the data warehouse. 
Query Tools 
One of the primary objects of data warehousing is to provide information to 
businesses to make strategic decisions. Query tools allow users to interact with the 
data warehouse system. 
These tools fall into four different categories: 
1. Query and reporting tools 
2. Application Development tools 
3. Data mining tools 
4. OLAP tools 
1. Query and reporting tools: 
Query and reporting tools can be further divided into 
• Reporting tools 
• Managed query tools 
Reporting tools: Reporting tools can be further divided into production reporting 
tools and desktop report writer. 
1. Report writers: This kind of reporting tool are tools designed for end-users 
for their analysis. 
2. Production reporting: This kind of tools allows organizations to generate 
regular operational reports. It also supports high volume batch jobs like 
printing and calculating. Some popular reporting tools are Brio, Business 
Objects, Oracle, Power Soft, SAS Institute. 
 
Managed query tools: 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 9 of 11 
 
This kind of access tools helps end users to resolve snags in database and SQL and 
database structure by inserting meta-layer between users and database. 
2. Application development tools: 
Sometimes built-in graphical and analytical tools do not satisfy the analytical 
needs of an organization. In such cases, custom reports are developed using 
Application development tools. 
3. Data mining tools: 
Data mining is a process of discovering meaningful new correlation, pattens, and 
trends by mining large amount data. Data mining tools are used to make this 
process automatic. 
4. OLAP tools: 
These tools are based on concepts of a multidimensional database. It allows users 
to analyse the data using elaborate and complex multidimensional views. 
Data warehouse Bus Architecture 
Data warehouse Bus determines the flow of data in your warehouse. The data flow 
in a data warehouse can be categorized as Inflow, Up flow, Downflow, Outflow and 
Meta flow. 
While designing a Data Bus, one needs to consider the shared dimensions, facts 
across data marts. 
Data Marts 
A data mart is an access layer which is used to get data out to the users. It is 
presented as an option for large size data warehouse as it takes less time and 
money to build. However, there is no standard definition of a data mart is differing 
from person to person. 
In a simple word Data mart is a subsidiary of a data warehouse. The data mart is 
used for partition of data which is created for the specific group of users. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 10 of 11 
 
Data marts could be created in the same database as the Datawarehouse or a 
physically separate Database. 
Data warehouse Architecture Best Practices 
To design Data Warehouse Architecture, you need to follow below given best 
practices: 
• Use a data model which is optimized for information retrieval which can be 
the dimensional mode, denormalized or hybrid approach. 
• Need to assure that Data is processed quickly and accurately. At the same 
time, you should take an approach which consolidates data into a single 
version of the truth. 
• Carefully design the data acquisition and cleansing process for Data 
warehouse. 
• Design a Metadata architecture which allows sharing of metadata between 
components of Data Warehouse 
• Consider implementing an ODS model when information retrieval need is 
near the bottom of the data abstraction pyramid or when there are multiple 
operational sources required to be accessed. 
• One should make sure that the data model is integrated and not just 
consolidated. In that case, you should consider 3NF data model. It is also 
ideal for acquiring ETL and Data cleansing tools 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary: 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 11 of 11 
 
• Data warehouse is an information system that contains historical and 
commutative data from single or multiple sources. 
• A data warehouse is subject oriented as it offers information regarding 
subject instead of organization's ongoing operations. 
• In Data Warehouse, integration means the establishment of a common unit 
of measure for all similar data from the different databases 
• Data warehouse is also non-volatile means the previous data is not erased 
when new data is entered in it. 
• A Datawarehouse is Time-variant as the data in a DW has high shelf life. 
• There are 5 main components of a Datawarehouse. 1) Database 2) ETL Tools 
3) Meta Data 4) Query Tools 5) DataMarts 
• These are four main categories of query tools 1. Query and reporting, tools 2. 
Application Development tools, 3. Data mining tools 4. OLAP tools 
• The data sourcing, transformation, and migration tools are used for 
performing all the conversions and summarizations. 
• In the Data Warehouse Architecture, meta-data plays an important role as it 
specifies the source, usage, values, and features of data warehouse data. 
 

