--- PAGE 1 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 1 of 11 
 
Data Mining Process, Techniques, Tools & 
Examples 
What is Data Mining? 
Data mining is looking for hidden, valid, and potentially useful patterns in huge 
data sets. Data Mining is all about discovering unsuspected/ previously unknown 
relationships amongst the data. 
It is a multi-disciplinary skill that uses machine learning, statistics, AI and database 
technology. 
The insights derived via Data Mining can be used for marketing, fraud detection, 
and scientific discovery, etc. 
Data mining is also called as Knowledge discovery, Knowledge extraction, 
data/pattern analysis, information harvesting, etc. 
Types of Data 
Data mining can be performed on following types of data 
• Relational databases 
• Data warehouses 
• Advanced DB and information repositories 
• Object-oriented and object-relational databases 
• Transactional and Spatial databases 
• Heterogeneous and legacy databases 
• Multimedia and streaming database 
• Text databases 
• Text mining and Web mining 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 2 of 11 
 
Data Mining Implementation Process 
 
 
 
Let's study the Data Mining implementation process in detail 
Business understanding: 
In this phase, business and data-mining goals are established. 
• First, you need to understand business and client objectives. You need to 
define what your client wants (which many times even they do not know 
themselves) 
• Take stock of the current data mining scenario. Factor in resources, 
assumption, constraints, and other significant factors into your assessment. 
• Using business objectives and current scenario, define your data mining 
goals. 
• A good data mining plan is very detailed and should be developed to 
accomplish both business and data mining goals. 
Data understanding: 
In this phase, sanity check on data is performed to check whether its appropriate 
for the data mining goals. 
• First, data is collected from multiple data sources available in the 
organization. 
• These data sources may include multiple databases, flat filer or data cubes. 
There are issues like object matching and schema integration which can 
arise during Data Integration process. It is a quite complex and tricky process 
as data from various sources unlikely to match easily. For example, table A 
contains an entity named cust_no whereas another table B contains an 
entity named cust-id. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 3 of 11 
 
• Therefore, it is quite difficult to ensure that both of these given objects refer 
to the same value or not. Here, Metadata should be used to reduce errors in 
the data integration process. 
• Next, the step is to search for properties of acquired data. A good way to 
explore the data is to answer the data mining questions (decided in business 
phase) using the query, reporting, and visualization tools. 
• Based on the results of query, the data quality should be ascertained. 
Missing data if any should be acquired. 
Data preparation: 
In this phase, data is made production ready. 
The data preparation process consumes about 90% of the time of the project. 
The data from different sources should be selected, cleaned, transformed, 
formatted, anonymized, and constructed (if required). 
Data cleaning is a process to "clean" the data by smoothing noisy data and filling in 
missing values. 
For example, for a customer demographics profile, age data is missing. The data is 
incomplete and should be filled. In some cases, there could be data outliers. For 
instance, age has a value 300. Data could be inconsistent. For instance, name of the 
customer is different in different tables. 
Data transformation operations change the data to make it useful in data mining. 
Following transformation can be applied 
Data transformation: 
Data transformation operations would contribute toward the success of the mining 
process. 
Smoothing: It helps to remove noise from the data. 
Aggregation: Summary or aggregation operations are applied to the data. I.e., the 
weekly sales data is aggregated to calculate the monthly and yearly total. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 4 of 11 
 
Generalization: In this step, Low-level data is replaced by higher-level concepts 
with the help of concept hierarchies. For example, the city is replaced by the 
county. 
Normalization: Normalization performed when the attribute data are scaled up o 
scaled down. Example: Data should fall in the range -2.0 to 2.0 post-normalization. 
Attribute construction: these attributes are constructed and included the given 
set of attributes helpful for data mining. 
The result of this process is a final data set that can be used in modeling. 
Modelling 
In this phase, mathematical models are used to determine data patterns. 
• Based on the business objectives, suitable modeling techniques should be 
selected for the prepared dataset. 
• Create a scenario to test check the quality and validity of the model. 
• Run the model on the prepared dataset. 
• Results should be assessed by all stakeholders to make sure that model can 
meet data mining objectives. 
Evaluation: 
In this phase, patterns identified are evaluated against the business objectives. 
• Results generated by the data mining model should be evaluated against the 
business objectives. 
• Gaining business understanding is an iterative process. In fact, while 
understanding, new business requirements may be raised because of data 
mining. 
• A go or no-go decision is taken to move the model in the deployment phase. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 5 of 11 
 
Deployment: 
In the deployment phase, you ship your data mining discoveries to everyday 
business operations. 
• The knowledge or information discovered during data mining process 
should be made easy to understand for non-technical stakeholders. 
• A detailed deployment plan, for shipping, maintenance, and monitoring of 
data mining discoveries is created. 
• A final project report is created with lessons learned and key experiences 
during the project. This helps to improve the organization's business policy. 
 
Data Mining Techniques 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 6 of 11 
 
1.Classification: 
This analysis is used to retrieve important and relevant information about data, 
and metadata. This data mining method helps to classify data in different classes. 
2. Clustering: 
Clustering analysis is a data mining technique to identify data that are like each 
other. This process helps to understand the differences and similarities between 
the data. 
3. Regression: 
Regression analysis is the data mining method of identifying and analyzing the 
relationship between variables. It is used to identify the likelihood of a specific 
variable, given the presence of other variables. 
4. Association Rules: 
This data mining technique helps to find the association between two or more 
Items. It discovers a hidden pattern in the data set. 
5. Outer detection: 
This type of data mining technique refers to observation of data items in the 
dataset which do not match an expected pattern or expected behavior. This 
technique can be used in a variety of domains, such as intrusion, detection, fraud 
or fault detection, etc. Outer detection is also called Outlier Analysis or Outlier 
mining. 
6. Sequential Patterns: 
This data mining technique helps to discover or identify similar patterns or trends 
in transaction data for certain period. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 7 of 11 
 
7. Prediction: 
Prediction has used a combination of the other data mining techniques like trends, 
sequential patterns, clustering, classification, etc. It analyzes past events or 
instances in a right sequence for predicting a future event. 
Challenges of Implementation of Data mine: 
• Skilled Experts are needed to formulate the data mining queries. 
• Overfitting: Due to small size training database, a model may not fit future 
states. 
• Data mining needs large databases which sometimes are difficult to manage 
• Business practices may need to be modified to determine to use the 
information uncovered. 
• If the data set is not diverse, data mining results may not be accurate. 
• Integration information needed from heterogeneous databases and global 
information systems could be complex 
Data mining Examples: 
Example 1: 
Consider a marketing head of telecom service provides who wants to increase 
revenues of long-distance services. For high ROI on his sales and marketing efforts 
customer profiling is important. He has a vast data pool of customer information 
like age, gender, income, credit history, etc. But its impossible to determine 
characteristics of people who prefer long distance calls with manual analysis. 
Using data mining techniques, he may uncover patterns between high long 
distance call users and their characteristics. 
For example, he might learn that his best customers are married females between 
the age of 45 and 54 who make more than $80,000 per year. Marketing efforts can 
be targeted to such demographic. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 8 of 11 
 
Example 2: 
A bank wants to search new ways to increase revenues from its credit card 
operations. They want to check whether usage would double if fees were halved. 
Bank has multiple years of record on average credit card balances, payment 
amounts, credit limit usage, and other key parameters. They create a model to 
check the impact of the proposed new business policy. The data results show that 
cutting fees in half for a targeted customer base could increase revenues by $10 
million. 
Data Mining Tools 
Following are 2 popular Data Mining Tools widely used in Industry 
R-language: 
R language is an open source tool for statistical computing and graphics. R has a 
wide variety of statistical, classical statistical tests, time-series analysis, 
classification and graphical techniques. It offers effective data handling and 
storage facility. 
Oracle Data Mining: 
Oracle Data Mining popularly knowns as ODM is a module of the Oracle Advanced 
Analytics Database. This Data mining tool allows data analysts to generate detailed 
insights and makes predictions. It helps predict customer behavior, develops 
customer profiles, identifies cross-selling opportunities. 
Benefits of Data Mining: 
• Data mining technique helps companies to get knowledge-based 
information. 
• Data mining helps organizations to make the profitable adjustments in 
operation and production. 
• The data mining is a cost-effective and efficient solution compared to other 
statistical data applications. 
• Data mining helps with the decision-making process. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 9 of 11 
 
• Facilitates automated prediction of trends and behaviors as well as 
automated discovery of hidden patterns. 
• It can be implemented in new systems as well as existing platforms 
• It is the speedy process which makes it easy for the users to analyze huge 
amount of data in less time. 
Disadvantages of Data Mining 
• There are chances of companies may sell useful information of their 
customers to other companies for money. For example, American Express 
has sold credit card purchases of their customers to the other companies. 
• Many data mining analytics software is difficult to operate and requires 
advance training to work on. 
• Different data mining tools work in different manners due to different 
algorithms employed in their design. Therefore, the selection of correct data 
mining tool is a very difficult task. 
• The data mining techniques are not accurate, and so it can cause serious 
consequences in certain conditions. 
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 10 of 11 
 
Applications 
Usage 
Communications 
Data mining techniques are used in communication sector to predict 
customer behavior to offer highly targeted and relevant campaigns. 
Insurance 
Data mining helps insurance companies to price their products profitable 
and promote new offers to their new or existing customers. 
Education 
Data mining benefits educators to access student data, predict achievement 
levels and find students or groups of students which need extra attention. 
For example, students who are weak in maths subject. 
Manufacturing 
With the help of Data Mining Manufacturers can predict wear and tear of 
production assets. They can anticipate maintenance which helps them 
reduce them to minimize downtime. 
Banking 
Data mining helps finance sector to get a view of market risks and manage 
regulatory compliance. It helps banks to identify probable defaulters to 
decide whether to issue credit cards, loans, etc. 
Retail 
Data Mining techniques help retail malls and grocery stores identify and 
arrange most sellable items in the most attentive positions. It helps store 
owners to comes up with the offer which encourages customers to increase 
their spending. 
Service Providers 
Service providers like mobile phone and utility industries use Data Mining to 
predict the reasons when a customer leaves their company. They analyze 
billing details, customer service interactions, complaints made to the 
company to assign each customer a probability score and offers incentives. 
E-Commerce 
E-commerce websites use Data Mining to offer cross-sells and up-sells 
through their websites. One of the most famous names is Amazon, who use 
Data mining techniques to get more customers into their eCommerce store. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 11 of 11 
 
Where is Data Mining used? 
Summary: 
• Data Mining is all about explaining the past and predicting the future for 
analysis. 
• Data mining helps to extract information from huge sets of data. It is the 
procedure of mining knowledge from data. 
• Data mining process includes business understanding, Data Understanding, 
Data Preparation, Modelling, Evolution, Deployment. 
• Important Data mining techniques are Classification, clustering, Regression, 
Association rules, Outer detection, Sequential Patterns, and prediction 
• R-language and Oracle Data mining are prominent data mining tools. 
• Data mining technique helps companies to get knowledge-based 
information. 
• The main drawback of data mining is that many analytics software is difficult 
to operate and requires advance training to work on. 
• Data mining is used in diverse industries such as Communications, 
Insurance, Education, Manufacturing, Banking, Retail, Service providers, 
eCommerce, Supermarkets Bioinformatics. 
 
Super Markets 
Data Mining allows supermarket's develop rules to predict if their shoppers 
were likely to be expecting. By evaluating their buying pattern, they could 
find woman customers who are most likely pregnant. They can start 
targeting products like baby powder, baby shop, diapers and so on. 
Crime 
Investigation 
Data Mining helps crime investigation agencies to deploy police workforce 
(where is a crime most likely to happen and when?), who to search at a 
border crossing etc. 
Bioinformatics 
Data Mining helps to mine biological data from massive datasets gathered in 
biology and medicine. 

