--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
Make Data Work
strataconf.com
Presented by O’Reilly and Cloudera, 
Strata + Hadoop World is where 
cutting-edge data science and new 
business fundamentals intersect—
and merge.
n Learn business applications of 
data technologies
n Develop new skills through 
trainings and in-depth tutorials
n Connect with an international 
community of thousands who 
work with data
Job # 15420

--- PAGE 3 ---
Tim O’Reilly, Mike Loukides, 
Julie Steele, and Colin Hill
How Data Science Is 
Transforming Health Care

--- PAGE 4 ---
ISBN: 978-1-449-34500-6
How Data Science Is Transforming Health Care
by Tim O’Reilly, Mike Loukides, Julie Steele, and Colin Hill
Copyright © 2012 O’Reilly Media. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. 
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For 
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: (800) 
998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Interior Designer: David Futato
August 2012: 
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2012-08-20
First release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781449345006 for release details.
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered 
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and 
O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed 
in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher 
and authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting 
from the use of the information contained herein.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Table of Contents
1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
2. Making Health Care More Effective. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
3. More Data, More Sources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
4. Paying for Results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
5. Enabling Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
6. Building the Health Care System We Want. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
7. Recommended Reading. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
iii

--- PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The best minds of my generation are thinking about how to make 
people click ads.
— Jeff Hammerbacher
 early Facebook employee
Work on stuff that matters.
— Tim O’Reilly
In the early days of the 20th century, department store magnate John 
Wanamaker famously said, “I know that half of my advertising doesn’t 
work. The problem is that I don’t know which half.”
The consumer Internet revolution was fueled by a search for the an
swer to Wanamaker’s question. Google AdWords and the pay-per-
click model began the transformation of a business in which adver
tisers paid for ad impressions into one in which they pay for results. 
“Cost per thousand impressions” (CPM) was outperformed by “cost 
per click” (CPC), and a new industry was born. It’s important to un
derstand why CPC outperformed CPM, though. Superficially, it’s be
cause Google was able to track when a user clicked on a link, and was 
therefore able to bill based on success. But billing based on success 
doesn’t fundamentally change anything unless you can also change the 
success rate, and that’s what Google was able to do. By using data to 
understand each user’s behavior, Google was able to place advertise
ments that an individual was likely to click. They knew “which half” 
of their advertising was more likely to be effective, and didn’t bother 
with the rest.
1

--- PAGE 8 ---
Since then, data and predictive analytics have driven ever deeper in
sight into user behavior such that companies like Google, Facebook, 
Twitter, and LinkedIn are fundamentally data companies. And data 
isn’t just transforming the consumer Internet. It is transforming fi
nance, design, and manufacturing—and perhaps most importantly, 
health care. How is data science transforming health care? There are 
many ways in which health care is changing, and needs to change. 
We’re focusing on one particular issue: the problem Wanamaker de
scribed when talking about his advertising. How do you make sure 
you’re spending money effectively? Is it possible to know what will 
work in advance?
Too often, when doctors order a treatment, whether it’s surgery or an 
over-the-counter medication, they are applying a “standard of care” 
treatment or some variation that is based on their own intuition, ef
fectively hoping for the best. The sad truth of medicine is that we don’t 
always understand the relationship between treatments and out
comes. We have studies to show that various treatments will work 
more often than placebos; but, like Wanamaker, we know that much 
of our medicine doesn’t work for half of our patients, we just don’t 
know which half. At least, not in advance. One of data science’s many 
promises is that, if we can collect enough data about medical treat
ments and use that data effectively, we’ll be able to predict more ac
curately which treatments will be effective for which patient, and 
which treatments won’t.
A better understanding of the relationship between treatments, out
comes, and patients will have a huge impact on the practice of medi
cine in the United States. Health care is expensive. The U.S. spends 
over $2.6 trillion on health care every year, an amount that consti
tutes a serious fiscal burden for government, businesses, and our so
ciety as a whole. These costs include over $600 billion of unex
plained variations in treatments: treatments that cause no differ
ences in outcomes, or even make the patient’s condition worse. We 
have reached a point at which our need to understand treatment ef
fectiveness has become vital—to the health care system and to the 
health and sustainability of the economy overall.
Why do we believe that data science has the potential to revolution
ize health care? After all, the medical industry has had data for gen
erations: clinical studies, insurance data, hospital records. But the 
health care industry is now awash in data in a way that it has never 
been before: from biological data such as gene expression, next-
2 
| 
Introduction

--- PAGE 9 ---
generation DNA sequence data, proteomics, and metabolomics, to 
clinical data and health outcomes data contained in ever more preva
lent electronic health records (EHRs) and longitudinal drug and med
ical claims. We have entered a new era in which we can work on 
massive datasets effectively, combining data from clinical trials and 
direct observation by practicing physicians (the records generated by 
our $2.6 trillion of medical expense). When we combine data with the 
resources needed to work on the data, we can start asking the impor
tant questions, the Wanamaker questions, about what treatments work 
and for whom.
The opportunities are huge: for entrepreneurs and data scientists 
looking to put their skills to work disrupting a large market, for re
searchers trying to make sense out of the flood of data they are now 
generating, and for existing companies (including health insurance 
companies, biotech, pharmaceutical, and medical device companies, 
hospitals and other care providers) that are looking to remake their 
businesses for the coming world of outcome-based payment models.
Introduction 
| 
3

--- PAGE 10 ---

--- PAGE 11 ---
CHAPTER 2
Making Health Care More Effective
What, specifically, does data allow us to do that we couldn’t do be
fore? For the past 60 or so years of medical history, we’ve treated 
patients as some sort of an average. A doctor would diagnose a con
dition and recommend a treatment based on what worked for most 
people, as reflected in large clinical studies. Over the years, we’ve be
come more sophisticated about what that average patient means, but 
that same statistical approach didn’t allow for differences between 
patients. A treatment was deemed effective or ineffective, safe or un
safe, based on double-blind studies that rarely took into account the 
differences between patients. With the data that’s now available, we 
can go much further. The exceptions to this are relatively recent and 
have been dominated by cancer treatments, the first being Herceptin 
for breast cancer in women who over-express the Her2 receptor. With 
the data that’s now available, we can go much further for a broad range 
of diseases and interventions that are not just drugs but include sur
gery, disease management programs, medical devices, patient adher
ence, and care delivery.
For a long time, we thought that Tamoxifen was roughly 80% effec
tive for breast cancer patients. But now we know much more: we know 
that it’s 100% effective in 70% to 80% of the patients, and ineffective 
in the rest. That’s not word games, because we can now use genetic 
markers to tell whether it’s likely to be effective or ineffective for any 
given patient, and we can tell in advance whether to treat with Tamox
ifen or to try something else.
Two factors lie behind this new approach to medicine: a different way 
of using data, and the availability of new kinds of data. It’s not just 
5

--- PAGE 12 ---
stating that the drug is effective on most patients, based on trials 
(indeed, 80% is an enviable success rate); it’s using artificial intelli
gence techniques to divide the patients into groups and then deter
mine the difference between those groups. We’re not asking whether 
the drug is effective; we’re asking a fundamentally different question: 
“for which patients is this drug effective?” We’re asking about the 
patients, not just the treatments. A drug that’s only effective on 1% of 
patients might be very valuable if we can tell who that 1% is, though 
it would certainly be rejected by any traditional clinical trial.
More than that, asking questions about patients is only possible be
cause we’re using data that wasn’t available until recently: DNA se
quencing was only invented in the mid-1970s, and is only now com
ing into its own as a medical tool. What we’ve seen with Tamoxifen is 
as clear a solution to the Wanamaker problem as you could ask for: we 
now know when that treatment will be effective. If you can do the same 
thing with millions of cancer patients, you will both improve out
comes and save money.
Dr. Lukas Wartman, a cancer researcher who was himself diagnosed 
with terminal leukemia, was successfully treated with sunitinib, a drug 
that was only approved for kidney cancer. Sequencing the genes of 
both the patient’s healthy cells and cancerous cells led to the discov
ery of a protein that was out of control and encouraging the spread of 
the cancer. The gene responsible for manufacturing this protein could 
potentially be inhibited by the kidney drug, although it had never been 
tested for this application. This unorthodox treatment was surpris
ingly effective: Wartman is now in remission.
While this treatment was exotic and expensive, what’s important isn’t 
the expense but the potential for new kinds of diagnosis. The price of 
gene sequencing has been plummeting; it will be a common doctor’s 
office procedure in a few years. And through Amazon and Google, you 
can now “rent” a cloud-based supercomputing cluster that can solve 
huge analytic problems for a few hundred dollars per hour. What is 
now exotic inevitably becomes routine.
But even more important: we’re looking at a completely different ap
proach to treatment. Rather than a treatment that works 80% of the 
time, or even 100% of the time for 80% of the patients, a treatment 
might be effective for a small group. It might be entirely specific to the 
individual; the next cancer patient may have a different protein that’s 
out of control, an entirely different genetic cause for the disease. 
6 
| 
Making Health Care More Effective

--- PAGE 13 ---
Treatments that are specific to one patient don’t exist in medicine as 
it’s currently practiced; how could you ever do an FDA trial for a 
medication that’s only going to be used once to treat a certain kind of 
cancer?
Foundation Medicine is at the forefront of this new era in cancer 
treatment. They use next-generation DNA sequencing to discover 
DNA sequence mutations and deletions that are currently used in 
standard of care treatments, as well as many other actionable muta
tions that are tied to drugs for other types of cancer. They are creat
ing a patient-outcomes repository that will be the fuel for discover
ing the relation between mutations and drugs. Foundation has iden
tified DNA mutations in 50% of cancer cases for which drugs exist 
(information via a private communication), but are not currently used 
in the standard of care for the patient’s particular cancer.
The ability to do large-scale computing on genetic data gives us the 
ability to understand the origins of disease. If we can understand why 
an anti-cancer drug is effective (what specific proteins it affects), and 
if we can understand what genetic factors are causing the cancer to 
spread, then we’re able to use the tools at our disposal much more 
effectively. Rather than using imprecise treatments organized around 
symptoms, we’ll be able to target the actual causes of disease, and 
design treatments tuned to the biology of the specific patient. Even
tually, we’ll be able to treat 100% of the patients 100% of the time, 
precisely because we realize that each patient presents a unique prob
lem.
Personalized treatment is just one area in which we can solve the 
Wanamaker problem with data. Hospital admissions are extremely 
expensive. Data can make hospital systems more efficient, and avoid 
preventable complications such as blood clots and hospital re-
admissions. It can also help address the challenge of health care hot-
spotting (a term coined by Atul Gawande): finding people who use an 
inordinate amount of health care resources. By looking at data from 
hospital visits, Dr. Jeffrey Brenner of Camden, NJ, was able to deter
mine that “just one per cent of the hundred thousand people who made 
use of Camden’s medical facilities accounted for thirty per cent of its 
costs.” Furthermore, many of these people came from only two apart
ment buildings. Designing more effective medical care for these pa
tients was difficult; it doesn’t fit our health insurance system, the pa
tients are often dealing with many serious medical issues (addiction 
and obesity are frequent complications), and have trouble trusting 
Making Health Care More Effective 
| 
7

--- PAGE 14 ---
doctors and social workers. It’s counter-intuitive, but spending more 
on some patients now results in spending less on them when they 
become really sick. While it’s a work in progress, it looks like build
ing appropriate systems to target these high-risk patients and treat 
them before they’re hospitalized will bring significant savings.
Many poor health outcomes are attributable to patients who don’t take 
their medications. Eliza, a Boston-based company started by 
Alexandra Drane, has pioneered approaches to improve compliance 
through interactive communication with patients. Eliza improves pa
tient drug compliance by tracking which types of reminders work on 
which types of people; it’s similar to the way companies like Google 
target advertisements to individual consumers. By using data to ana
lyze each patient’s behavior, Eliza can generate reminders that are 
more likely to be effective. The results aren’t surprising: if patients take 
their medicine as prescribed, they are more likely to get better. And if 
they get better, they are less likely to require further, more expensive 
treatment. Again, we’re using data to solve Wanamaker’s problem in 
medicine: we’re spending our resources on what’s effective, on appro
priate reminders that are mostly to get patients to take their medica
tions.
8 
| 
Making Health Care More Effective

--- PAGE 15 ---
CHAPTER 3
More Data, More Sources
The examples we’ve looked at so far have been limited to traditional 
sources of medical data: hospitals, research centers, doctor’s offices, 
insurers. The Internet has enabled the formation of patient networks 
aimed at sharing data. Health social networks now are some of the 
largest patient communities. As of November 2011, PatientsLikeMe 
has over 120,000 patients in 500 different condition groups; ACOR has 
over 100,000 patients in 127 cancer support groups; 23andMe has 
over 100,000 members in their genomic database; and diabetes health 
social network SugarStats has over 10,000 members. These are just the 
larger communities, thousands of small communities are created 
around rare diseases, or even uncommon experiences with common 
diseases. All of these communities are generating data that they vol
untarily share with each other and the world.
Increasingly, what they share is not just anecdotal, but includes an 
array of clinical data. For this reason, these groups are being recruit
ed for large-scale crowdsourced clinical outcomes research.
Thanks to ubiquitous data networking through the mobile network, 
we can take several steps further. In the past two or three years, there’s 
been a flood of personal fitness devices (such as the Fitbit) for moni
toring your personal activity. There are mobile apps for taking your 
pulse, and an iPhone attachment for measuring your glucose. There 
has been talk of mobile applications that would constantly listen to a 
patient’s speech and detect changes that might be the precursor for a 
stroke, or would use the accelerometer to report falls. Tanzeem 
Choudhury has developed an app called Be Well that is intended 
primarily for victims of depression, though it can be used by anyone. 
9

--- PAGE 16 ---
Be Well monitors the user’s sleep cycles, the amount of time they spend 
talking, and the amount of time they spend walking. The data is scor
ed, and the app makes appropriate recommendations, based both on 
the individual patient and data collected across all the app’s users.
Continuous monitoring of critical patients in hospitals has been nor
mal for years; but we now have the tools to monitor patients constant
ly, in their home, at work, wherever they happen to be. And if this 
sounds like big brother, at this point most of the patients are willing. 
We don’t want to transform our lives into hospital experiences; far 
from it! But we can collect and use the data we constantly emit, our 
“data exhaust,” to maintain our health, to become conscious of our 
behavior, and to detect oncoming conditions before they become se
rious. The most effective medical care is the medical care you avoid 
because you don’t need it.
10 
| 
More Data, More Sources

--- PAGE 17 ---
CHAPTER 4
Paying for Results
Once we’re on the road toward more effective health care, we can look 
at other ways in which Wanamaker’s problem shows up in the medi
cal industry. It’s clear that we don’t want to pay for treatments that are 
ineffective. Wanamaker wanted to know which part of his advertis
ing was effective, not just to make better ads, but also so that he 
wouldn’t have to buy the advertisements that wouldn’t work. He 
wanted to pay for results, not for ad placements. Now that we’re start
ing to understand how to make treatment effective, now that we un
derstand that it’s more than rolling the dice and hoping that a treat
ment that works for a typical patient will be effective for you, we can 
take the next step: Can we change the underlying incentives in the 
medical system? Can we make the system better by paying for results, 
rather than paying for procedures?
It’s shocking just how badly the incentives in our current medical 
system are aligned with outcomes. If you see an orthopedist, you’re 
likely to get an MRI, most likely at a facility owned by the orthoped
ist’s practice. On one hand, it’s good medicine to know what you’re 
doing before you operate. But how often does that MRI result in a 
different treatment? How often is the MRI required just because it’s 
part of the protocol, when it’s perfectly obvious what the doctor needs 
to do? Many men have had PSA tests for prostate cancer; but in most 
cases, aggressive treatment of prostate cancer is a bigger risk than the 
disease itself. Yet the test itself is a significant profit center. Think again 
about Tamoxifen, and about the pharmaceutical company that makes 
it. In our current system, what does “100% effective in 80% of the 
patients” mean, except for a 20% loss in sales? That’s because the drug 
11

--- PAGE 18 ---
company is paid for the treatment, not for the result; it has no finan
cial interest in whether any individual patient gets better. (Whether a 
statistically significant number of patients has side-effects is a differ
ent issue.) And at the same time, bringing a new drug to market is very 
expensive, and might not be worthwhile if it will only be used on the 
remaining 20% of the patients. And that’s assuming that one drug, not 
two, or 20, or 200 will be required to treat the unlucky 20% effectively.
It doesn’t have to be this way.
In the U.K., Johnson & Johnson, faced with the possibility of losing 
reimbursements for their multiple myeloma drug Velcade, agreed to 
refund the money for patients who did not respond to the drug. Several 
other pay-for-performance drug deals have followed since, paving the 
way for the ultimate transition in pharmaceutical company business 
models in which their product is health outcomes instead of pills. Such 
a transition would rely more heavily on real-world outcome data 
(are patients actually getting better?), rather than controlled clinical 
trials, and would use molecular diagnostics to create personalized 
“treatment algorithms.” Pharmaceutical companies would also focus 
more on drug compliance to ensure health outcomes were being 
achieved. This would ultimately align the interests of drug makers with 
patients, their providers, and payors.
Similarly, rather than paying for treatments and procedures, can we 
pay hospitals and doctors for results? That’s what Accountable Care 
Organizations (ACOs) are about. ACOs are a leap forward in busi
ness model design, where the provider shoulders any financial risk. 
ACOs represent a new framing of the much maligned HMO ap
proaches from the ’90s, which did not work. HMOs tried to use sta
tistics to predict and prevent unneeded care. The ACO model, rath
er than controlling doctors with what the data says they “should” do, 
uses data to measure how each doctor performs. Doctors are paid for 
successes, not for the procedures they administer. The main advan
tage that the ACO model has over the HMO model is how good the 
data is, and how that data is leveraged. The ACO model aligns incen
tives with outcomes: a practice that owns an MRI facility isn’t incen
tivized to order MRIs when they’re not necessary. It is incentivized to 
use all the data at its disposal to determine the most effective treat
ment for the patient, and to follow through on that treatment with a 
minimum of unnecessary testing.
12 
| 
Paying for Results

--- PAGE 19 ---
When we know which procedures are likely to be successful, we’ll be 
in a position where we can pay only for the health care that works. 
When we can do that, we’ve solved Wanamaker’s problem for health 
care.
Paying for Results 
| 
13

--- PAGE 20 ---

--- PAGE 21 ---
CHAPTER 5
Enabling Data
Data science is not optional in health care reform; it is the linchpin of 
the whole process. All of the examples we’ve seen, ranging from can
cer treatment to detecting hot spots where additional intervention will 
make hospital admission unnecessary, depend on using data effec
tively: taking advantage of new data sources and new analytics tech
niques, in addition to the data the medical profession has had all along.
But it’s too simple just to say “we need data.” We’ve had data all along: 
handwritten records in manila folders on acres and acres of shelving. 
Insurance company records. But it’s all been locked up in silos: insur
ance silos, hospital silos, and many, many doctor’s office silos. Data 
doesn’t help if it can’t be moved, if data sources can’t be combined.
There are two big issues here. First, a surprising number of medical 
records are still either hand-written, or in digital formats that are 
scarcely better than hand-written (for example, scanned images of 
hand-written records). Getting medical records into a format that’s 
computable is a prerequisite for almost any kind of progress. Second, 
we need to break down those silos.
Anyone who has worked with data knows that, in any problem, 90% 
of the work is getting the data in a form in which it can be used; the 
analysis itself is often simple. We need electronic health records: pa
tient data in a more-or-less standard form that can be shared effi
ciently, data that can be moved from one location to another at the 
speed of the Internet. Not all data formats are created equal, and some 
are certainly better than others: but at this point, any machine-readable 
format, even simple text files, is better than nothing. While there are 
15

--- PAGE 22 ---
currently hundreds of different formats for electronic health records, 
the fact that they’re electronic means that they can be converted from 
one form into another. Standardizing on a single format would make 
things much easier, but just getting the data into some electronic form, 
any, is the first step.
Once we have electronic health records, we can link doctor’s offices, 
labs, hospitals, and insurers into a data network, so that all patient data 
is immediately stored in a data center: every prescription, every pro
cedure, and whether that treatment was effective or not. This isn’t 
some futuristic dream; it’s technology we have now. Building this 
network would be substantially simpler and cheaper than building the 
networks and data centers now operated by Google, Facebook, Ama
zon, Apple, and many other large technology companies. It’s not even 
close to pushing the limits.
Electronic health records enable us to go far beyond the current mech
anism of clinical trials. In the past, once a drug has been approved in 
trials, that’s effectively the end of the story: running more tests to 
determine whether it’s effective in practice would be a huge expense. 
A physician might get a sense for whether any treatment worked, but 
that evidence is essentially anecdotal: it’s easy to believe that some
thing is effective because that’s what you want to see. And if it’s shared 
with other doctors, it’s shared while chatting at a medical conven
tion. But with electronic health records, it’s possible (and not even 
terribly expensive) to collect documentation from thousands of physi
cians treating millions of patients. We can find out when and where a 
drug was prescribed, why, and whether there was a good outcome. We 
can ask questions that are never part of clinical trials: is the medica
tion used in combination with anything else? What other conditions 
is the patient being treated for? We can use machine learning techni
ques to discover unexpected combinations of drugs that work well 
together, or to predict adverse reactions. We’re no longer limited by 
clinical trials; every patient can be part of an ongoing evaluation of 
whether his treatment is effective, and under what conditions. Tech
nically, this isn’t hard. The only difficult part is getting the data to 
move, getting data in a form where it’s easily transferred from the 
doctor’s office to analytics centers.
To solve problems of hot-spotting (individual patients or groups of 
patients consuming inordinate medical resources) requires a differ
ent combination of information. You can’t locate hot spots if you don’t 
have physical addresses. Physical addresses can be geocoded (con
16 
| 
Enabling Data

--- PAGE 23 ---
verted from addresses to longitude and latitude, which is more use
ful for mapping problems) easily enough, once you have them, but you 
need access to patient records from all the hospitals operating in the 
area under study. And you need access to insurance records to deter
mine how much health care patients are requiring, and to evaluate 
whether special interventions for these patients are effective. Not on
ly does this require electronic records, it requires cooperation across 
different organizations (breaking down silos), and assurance that the 
data won’t be misused (patient privacy). Again, the enabling factor is 
our ability to combine data from different sources; once you have the 
data, the solutions come easily.
Breaking down silos has a lot to do with aligning incentives. Current
ly, hospitals are trying to optimize their income from medical treat
ments, while insurance companies are trying to optimize their in
come by minimizing payments, and doctors are just trying to keep 
their heads above water. There’s little incentive to cooperate. But as 
financial pressures rise, it will become critically important for every
one in the health care system, from the patient to the insurance exec
utive, to assume that they are getting the most for their money. While 
there’s intense cultural resistance to be overcome (through our expe
rience in data science, we’ve learned that it’s often difficult to break 
down silos within an organization, let alone between organizations), 
the pressure of delivering more effective health care for less money will 
eventually break the silos down. The old zero-sum game of winners 
and losers must end if we’re going to have a medical system that’s 
effective over the coming decades.
Data becomes infinitely more powerful when you can mix data from 
different sources: many doctor’s offices, hospital admission records, 
address databases, and even the rapidly increasing stream of data 
coming from personal fitness devices. The challenge isn’t employing 
our statistics more carefully, precisely, or guardedly. It’s about let
ting go of an old paradigm that starts by assuming only certain vari
ables are key and ends by correlating only these variables. This para
digm worked well when data was scarce, but if you think about it, these 
assumptions arise precisely because data is scarce. We didn’t study the 
relationship between leukemia and kidney cancers because that would 
require asking a huge set of questions that would require collecting a 
lot of data; and a connection between leukemia and kidney cancer is 
no more likely than a connection between leukemia and flu. But the 
existence of data is no longer a problem: we’re collecting the data all 
Enabling Data 
| 
17

--- PAGE 24 ---
the time. Electronic health records let us move the data around so that 
we can assemble a collection of cases that goes far beyond a particu
lar practice, a particular hospital, a particular study. So now, we can 
use machine learning techniques to identify and test all possible hy
potheses, rather than just the small set that intuition might suggest. 
And finally, with enough data, we can get beyond correlation to cau
sation: rather than saying “A and B are correlated,” we’ll be able to 
say “A causes B,” and know what to do about it.
18 
| 
Enabling Data

--- PAGE 25 ---
CHAPTER 6
Building the Health Care System 
We Want
The U.S. ranks 37th out of developed economies in life expectancy and 
other measures of health, while by far outspending other countries on 
per-capita health care costs. We spend 18% of GDP on health care, 
while other countries on average spend on the order of 10% of GDP. 
We spend a lot of money on treatments that don’t work, because we 
have a poor understanding at best of what will and won’t work.
Part of the problem is cultural. In a country where even pets can have 
hip replacement surgery, it’s hard to imagine not spending every pen
ny you have to prolong Grandma’s life—or your own. The U.S. is a 
wealthy nation, and health care is something we choose to spend our 
money on. But wealthy or not, nobody wants ineffective treatments. 
Nobody wants to roll the dice and hope that their biology is similar 
enough to a hypothetical “average” patient. No one wants a “winner 
take all” payment system in which the patient is always the loser, 
paying for procedures whether or not they are helpful or necessary. 
Like Wanamaker with his advertisements, we want to know what 
works, and we want to pay for what works. We want a smarter sys
tem where treatments are designed to be effective on our individual 
biologies; where treatments are administered effectively; where our 
hospitals our used effectively; and where we pay for outcomes, not for 
procedures.
We’re on the verge of that new system now. We don’t have it yet, but 
we can see it around the corner. Ultra-cheap DNA sequencing in the 
19

--- PAGE 26 ---
doctor’s office, massive inexpensive computing power, the availabili
ty of EHRs to study whether treatments are effective even after the 
FDA trials are over, and improved techniques for analyzing data are 
the tools that will bring this new system about. The tools are here now; 
it’s up to us to put them into use.
20 
| 
Building the Health Care System We Want

--- PAGE 27 ---
CHAPTER 7
Recommended Reading
We recommend the following articles and books regarding technolo
gy, data, and health care reform:
• Ahier, Brian. “Big data is the next big thing in health IT,” O’Reilly 
Radar. February 27, 2012.
• Bigelow, Bruce. “Big Data, Big Biology, and the ‘Tipping Point’ in 
Quantified Health,” Xconomy. April 26, 2012.
• Brawley, Otis Webb. How We Do Harm: A Doctor Breaks Ranks 
About Being Sick in America. St. Marten’s Press, 2012.
• Christensen, Clayton M. et al. The Innovator’s Prescription: A 
Disruptive Solution for Health Care. McGraw Hill, 2008.
• Howard, Alex. “Data for the Public Good,” O’Reilly Radar. Feb
ruary 22, 2012.
• Manyika, James et al. “Big data: The next frontier for innovation, 
competition, and productivity,” McKinsey Global Institute. May, 
2011.
• Oram, Andy. “Five tough lessons I had to learn about health care,” 
O’Reilly Radar. March 26, 2012.
• Shah, Nigam H and Jessica D Tenenbaum. “The coming age of 
data-driven medicine: translational bioinformatics’ next frontier,” 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association (JAMIA). 
March 26, 2012.
• Trotter, Fred and David Uhlman. Meaningful Use and Beyond. 
O’Reilly Media, 2011.
21

--- PAGE 28 ---
• Wilbanks, John. “Valuing Health Care: Improving Productivity 
and Quality” [PDF], Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. April, 
2012
22 
| 
Recommended Reading

--- PAGE 29 ---
About the Authors
Tim O’Reilly is the founder and CEO of O’Reilly Media Inc., thought 
by many to be the best computer book publisher in the world. O’Reilly 
Media also hosts conferences on technology topics, including the 
O’Reilly Open Source Convention, Strata: The Business of Data, and 
many others. O’Reilly’s Make: magazine and Maker Faire has been 
compared to the West Coast Computer Faire, which launched the 
personal computer revolution. Tim’s blog, the O’Reilly Radar 
“watches the alpha geeks” to determine emerging technology trends, 
and serves as a platform for advocacy about issues of importance to 
the technical community. Tim is also a partner at O’Reilly AlphaTech 
Ventures, O’Reilly’s early stage venture firm, and is on the board of 
Safari Books Online.
Mike Loukides is Vice President of Content Strategy for O’Reilly 
Media, Inc. He’s edited many highly regarded books on technical 
subjects. He’s particularly interested in programming languages, Unix 
and what passes for Unix these days, and system and network admin
istration. Mike is the author of System Performance Tuning, and a 
coauthor of Unix Power Tools. Most recently, he’s been fooling around 
with data and data analysis, languages like R, Mathematica, and 
Octave, and thinking about how to make books social.
Julie Steele is the Content Editor for Strata at O’Reilly Media. She is 
coauthor of Beautiful Visualization and Designing Data Visualiza
tions. She finds beauty in exploring complex systems, and thinks in 
metaphors. The best part of her day is finding patterns across verti
cals and traditional silos, and connecting people who are working on 
similar problems in seemingly unrelated areas. She is particularly 
drawn to the visual medium as a way to understand and transmit 
information.
Colin Hill is the president, chairman, and cofounder of GNS Health
care. He brings years of hands-on scientific experience to his role, with 
expertise in the areas of computational physics and systems biology.

