--- PAGE 1 ---
THE DATA ANALYTICS
HANDBOOK
BIG DATA EDITION

--- PAGE 2 ---
1
ABOUT 
THE AUTHORS
BRIAN LIOU Content
Brian graduated from Cal with simultaneous degrees 
in Business Administration at the Haas School of 
Business and Statistics with an emphasis in Computer 
Science. He 
previously 
worked 
in 
investment 
banking before he transitioned into Data Analytics 
at MightyHive, an advertising technology company 
backed by Andreessen Horowitz.
DECLAN SHENER Content
Declan is in his third year at UC Berkeley where he 
studies Computer Science and Economics. He currently 
interns with San Francisco 49ers as a Data Analyst on 
their Business Operations team.
TRISTAN TAO Content
Tristan holds dual degrees in Computer Science and 
Statistics from UC Berkeley (‘14). He first began 
working as a quantitative technical data analyst at 
Starmine (Thomson Reuters). From there he worked 
as a software engineer at Splunk. He has experience 
working with various Machine Learning models, NLP, 
Hadoop/Hive, Storm, R, Python and Java.

--- PAGE 3 ---

HANDBOOK
DESIGN
ELIZABETH LIN Design
Elizabeth holds a degree in Computer Science with 
a focus in design from UC Berkeley (‘14). Previously, 
she was a teaching assistant for CS160, User Interface 
Design and Development. She has interned at Khan 
Academy as a Product Designer and at LinkedIn as a 
Web Developer. www.elizabethylin.com

--- PAGE 4 ---
H
ave you ever wondered what the deal was behind all the hype of “big 
data”? Well, so did we. In 2014, data science hit peak popularity, and as 
graduates with degrees in statistics, business, and computer science from UC 
Berkeley we found ourselves with a unique skillset that was in high demand. 
We recognized that as recent graduates, our foundational knowledge was purely 
theoretical; we lacked industry experience; we also realized that we were not 
alone in this predicament. And so, we sought out those who could supplement 
our knowledge, interviewing leaders, experts, and professionals - the giants 
in our industry. What began as a quest for the reality behind the buzzwords 
of “big data” and “data science,” The Data Analytics Handbook, quickly turned 
into our first educational product. Thirty plus interviews and four editions 
later, the handbook has been downloaded over 30,000 times by readers from 
all over the world. The interviews in this edition are ones we have selected 
as the most insightful based on our own growing experience in the industry. 
In them, you’ll discover whether “big data” is overblown, what skills your 
portfolio companies should look for when hiring a data scientist, how leading 
“big data” and analytics companies interview, and which industries will be 
most impacted by the disruptive power of data science.
2
From Tristan, Brian, Declan, & Elizabeth

--- PAGE 5 ---
TOP 5 TAKEAWAYS
THE BIG DATA EDITION
1. The terms Data Scientist and Data Engineer are not synonymous, 
but they are not mutually exclusive either. 
There exists a hybrid position that requires both a software engineering 
background as well as mastery of statistical analysis, but that is not the norm. 
Instead, expertise in one of the two with a good understanding of the other 
is important.  As a data engineer, you will be delivering the data that a data 
scientist uses, and vice versa.  Knowing how your data is being used and 
understanding your data are crucial to success in either of these positions.
2. The fundamentals are important.
Although projects are a great way to showcase your skills, it is more important to 
have a firm grasp of computer science and statistical concepts.  This knowledge 
is especially important in interviews, where you will likely be asked questions 
requiring the fundamental knowledge of algorithms and data structures to 
solve.
3. Know your data.
Even though data analysis platforms are rapidly improving, they are far from 
perfect.  Databases are complex and often data is imperfect.  Understanding 
your data and how to manipulate it is the first step to leveraging it effectively.
4. Big Data can be used for more than solving business problems.
Don’t think that Big Data can only be used to help a business make financial 
decisions or target consumers better.  Big Data will also be used to solve 
industrial issues such as energy and food shortages. The reality is that there is 
no industry that Big Data will not touch eventually.
5. Check out Spark
Apache Spark is the hottest big data technology developed at UC Berkeley’s 
AMP Lab. It runs programs up to 100X faster than Hadoop MapReduce in 
memory or 10X faster on disk. It’s one of the most contributed open source Big 
Data technologies and has high level abstractions to enable users to perform 
large scale data processing in Spark SQL.
3

--- PAGE 6 ---
4
05
09
13
18
21
24
MICHAEL JORDAN
CHUL LEE
JOHN AKRED
MAT T MCMANUS
JOHN SCHUSTER
TOM DAVENPORT
DISTINGUISHED EECS PROFESSOR
MYFITNESSPAL
SILICON VALLEY DATA SCIENCE
DATAMEER
PLATFORA
BABSON COLLEGE
TABLE OF CONTENTS

--- PAGE 7 ---
05
MICHAEL JORDAN
DISTINGUISHED EECS PROFESSOR AT UC BERKELEY
MICHAEL is the Pehong Chen Distinguished Professor in the Department of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and the Department of Statistics 
at the University of California, Berkeley.  His research in recent years has 
focused on Bayesian nonparametric analysis, probabilistic graphical models, 
spectral methods, kernel machines and applications to problems in signal 
processing, statistical genetics, computational biology, information retrieval 
and natural language processing.

--- PAGE 8 ---
06
Where do you think the biggest talent fall is within the Big 
Data Industry?
You have to know something about statistics and you have to know something 
about computer science.  Out in industry, they find it hard to find such people.
Do you need a graduate level degree in order to be one of 
those people?
Not necessarily.  It depends on what you’re doing, but again you do need both 
a solid background in computer science and statistics.  Current undergraduate 
curricula don’t allow you in four years to really get both, unless you’re really 
ambitious and do nothing but that.  Unfortunately, classes haven’t really 
been designed to include both computation and statistics.  It’s not the ideal 
situation, universities need to change too to blend the education of both. 
Right now you have to take about half a dozen statistics classes and about half 
a dozen computation courses of some kind on top of prerequisite courses for 
those majors.  That would be enough to get you a good job, where you could do 
a good job and have a meaningful career.  One way to do that might be to get a 
masters; either get a bachelor’s degree in either computer science or statistics 
and get master’s in the other.  
Undergraduate statistics curriculum tend to be theoretical, at 
least most universities.  How does this affect the way students 
are preparing to fulfill the roles in Big Data?
Everywhere it is; and they are not very computing centric.  I think there is 
one good class at Berkeley , [Concepts of Computing with Data], which brings 
together some amount of computing with statistics -- and that’s it.  Most of 
the other classes us the computer rarely, if at all.  So you get the principals, 
but you don’t really work with algorithms and procedures on real data a lot. 
Also, you don’t realize that a lot of the principals can be implemented in a 
computationally interesting way without having to do the math.  An example 
is that in industry there is something called the bootstrap, which is a way to 
get measures of uncertainty on many statistical estimates without using a 
formula by using a computer to simulate data.  That’s not taught anywhere in 
the undergraduate curriculum, which is crazy.  
In many cases data engineers are in charge of creating 
systems that data analysts use to analyze the data.  Do you 

--- PAGE 9 ---
think that these systems will ever be powerful enough to 
simply do their own analysis?
Not in general.  It’s really hard to do good inferences.  You can’t just push 
buttons.  You have to think about: how is the data sampled, how heterogeneous 
is the data, what do I put together with what; the features to represent the 
data; what procedures do I use and how.  It requires human judgement through 
many of the stages.  Think about databases as a kind of point and case.  A real 
world database requires a large amount of skill to use, and that’s just to move 
data around a query it.  Think about the inferential issues about predicting and 
sampling about how you get the data and what it’s being used for.  It’s just 
a much broader class of things.  If already in classical databases it’s hard to 
automate everything, you have to have humans turning them, it’s going to be 
far harder for inferential problems.  There’s a narrow class of problems, it may 
be involved in clustering and classification where it kind of get closer to just 
pushing a button, but for better or for worse there’s going to be a lot of jobs 
where you’re going to have to understand what you’re doing in the data analysis 
and what engineering approaches are feasible in that domain.  Of course, data 
analyst will get help as the interfaces will become better, platforms will be 
easier to use, systems become more scalable, and more standardization gets 
put in place.  These will eliminate a lot the grunge work that goes on such as 
collecting data, which is where a lot of work goes in now.  
Do you think the demand for these positions is overhyped?
No the demand is not overhyped. I think the demand for certain methodologies 
is overhyped of what you can and can’t achieve.  Some of the business plans 
are little crazy and overhyped, but the demand from my perspective is infinite 
relative to the supply.  Every company is looking for a data analyst or data 
scientist for the foreseeable future.  I don’t see that going away because I don’t 
think that problems are going to be solved that quickly.  Also, this is kind of 
scalable.  Every company has data and every company can use data in their 
plans somehow.  Any company who is going to use data at all seriously needs 
people who are working with the platform and who understand what data 
analysis is, and probably not just one person.  I think as company’s mature, I 
think company’s are going to realize they’re going to need a bigger staff than 
they find to do the data side of things.  A lot of companies are willing to put a 
lot of money and effort into hiring programmers and not much into the data 
07

--- PAGE 10 ---
analysis, and they’re going to realize that it’s a mistake.  
What Big Data technologies do you see becoming very 
popular within the next five years?
I don’t like to say that there’s a specific technology, I think that there are 
pipelines that you would build that have pieces to them.  How do you process 
the data, how do you represent it, how do you store it, what inferential problem 
are you trying to solve.  There’s a whole toolbox or ecosystem that you have to 
understand if you are going to be working in the field.  
Do students who want to prepare for these kinds of roles need 
to find resources outside of the university if they are trying to 
get into quickly?
A lot of the resources outside are not giving you the foundational fundamentals 
you need that are mathematical, statistical, and computational.  They’re 
teaching you the toolbox without the understanding of the toolbox.  I think 
supplementing coursework by working with real world datasets is productive. 
If you’ve got a solid set of fundamentals, working on projects is a great way to 
improve your skills.
08

--- PAGE 11 ---
09
CHUL LEE
HEAD OF DATA ENGINEERING AT MYFITNESSPAL
CHUL is the currently the Head of Data Engineering and Science at 
MyFitnessPal.  He brings over twelve years of experience in data scientist 
specifically experience designing, architecting, implementing, and measuring 
large-scale data processing and business-intelligence applications.

--- PAGE 12 ---
10
Does your data engineering team recruit people without much 
work experience in the industry (i.e. undergraduates, etc.)? If 
so, what is the biggest downfall that you see in these types of 
applicants?
We don’t expect fresh graduates to have a complete or thorough grasp of 
data science projects or skills. What we do care the most is their potential. 
We expect them to have a very strong preparation in the fundamentals of 
computer science and math. We care more about that than projects that they 
have completed.
Employers always say projects are important, but what types 
of projects specifically? What are the best resources for 
starting and doing these projects?
The best resource for starting or doing projects is doing school projects or 
research projects. I would rather see people who have worked on research 
projects than projects they did in their own spare time that don’t really have 
any depth. One of the problems that I’ve seen quite a bit is that people have 
claimed to have worked on their own data science pet projects, for example, a 
Twitter sentiment analysis project but there is no true depth associated with 
any of these projects. Thus, it is very difficult for us to clearly assess whether 
or not these projects were truly meeting some requirements that are normally 
associated with large scale practical data science problems. In addition, I 
believe that internships are also very important because they expose you to 
real world problems and they give you a good understanding of what kinds of 
technology stacks allow you to excel in this type of environment.
How much of a statistical background does a typical data 
engineer at MyFitnessPal need to have? Do the titles “Data 
Scientist” and “Data Engineer” tend to be mutually exclusive or 
do employees tend to have a lot of crossover skills?
Data engineering at MyFitnessPal does not require a strong background in 
statistics. However, Data Scientists and Data engineers are not completely 
mutually exclusive because both require some basic knowledge of system 
architectures. Data Engineers have to be smart enough to understand what Data 
Scientists are talking about, but it’s not necessary to have a heavy statistics 
background. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
At MyFitnessPal, Data Scientist roles and Data Engineering roles are well 
defined since the emphasis for each role is somewhat different. However, 
the overall trend in Silicon Valley is that everyone is part of the engineering 
organization. Thus, as a data scientist, you need to have a basic understanding of 
computer science, specifically data structures and algorithms. This is especially 
true when you have to deal with large scale data since the computation aspect 
of it becomes very critical. You can always come up with a fancy algorithm, 
but when you actually try to apply that in practice, making sure that your 
algorithm scales is very important. You need to have a basic understanding 
of the system or algorithm aspect of the problem. Even though you may not 
end up implementing that by yourself, you still need to be able communicate 
with other engineers. Similarly, when you’re a data engineer, you need to have 
a basic understanding of statistics, so when you’re talking to a data scientist 
you can understand what they are getting across to you. This is for the sake of 
communication, and working with a team that consists of people with different 
background as opposed to a skillset that is absolutely necessary to get a data 
science or data engineering job at MFP. 
In many cases, data engineers are in charge of creating 
systems data analysts can use. How important is a statistical 
analysis background for creating these systems?
The definition of Data Engineering at MyFitnessPal is the development of 
data products for users because we are a customer facing app. Again, data 
engineering emphasizes the engineering aspect of data product development 
as opposed to data science.
What specific technologies does your data engineering 
team use? Do you expect job applicants to already have a 
strong grasp of these technologies or is their a fair amount of 
learning by doing?
For offline big data technology stacks, we use Spark and Hadoop. For the actual 
service development, we use Scala. We don’t expect every new employee to 
already have a strong grasp of these technologies before joining MyFitnessPal. 
What we care the most about is whether the candidate is smart enough and has 
a strong preparation in the foundations of computer science. If the candidate 
is smart and motivated, then he/she can pick up these new technologies very 
quickly. Note that tools change all the time, but fundamentals rarely change 
11

--- PAGE 14 ---
over time.
Describe to me what the typical interview process is like for 
a Data Engineer. Additionally, what makes an applicant really 
stand out during this process?
Our typical interview process is very similar to that of other big companies in 
Silicon Valley. Our first interview is a technical phone screen consisting of coding 
and basic algorithm questions. If you pass that, the next interview is onsite. 
Our on-site interview consists of both technical and behavioral questions. 
For the technical part, we ask coding, algorithm, and math questions. For the 
behavioral part, we ask about past work experiences, personal and career goals. 
Once again, it is not much different than applying to be a software engineer in 
other companies.
12

--- PAGE 15 ---
13
JOHN AKRED
FOUNDER & CTO SILICON VALLEY DATA SCIENCE
With over 15 years in advanced analytical applications and architecture, John 
is dedicated to helping organizations become more data-driven. He combines 
deep expertise in analytics and data science with business acumen and dynamic 
engineering leadership.

--- PAGE 16 ---
14
With the emergence of Spark, Do you think there will still be 
a continued application of the traditional old-school batch-
style MapReduce? Or will Spark simply be the new industry 
standard?
I’d disagree with you on calling batch-style Hadoop old school (laughs), but 
I definitely think that Spark won’t completely replace the traditional batch-
style disk based approach. There are situations where you don’t quite have 
a use case for Spark. For example, a major retailer might want to know the 
difference between having Christmas on a Tuesday versus a Wednesday, but 
doesn’t want to keep that deep historical data involved in memory all the time. 
These certain situations might not warrant the need to migrate all data to in-
memory, and instead you might leverage Hadoop YARN. Moreover the spark 
cluster you need might be used for other critical real-time operations, which 
will compete with your historical analysis for resources. I think there might 
be enough cases where batch will stick around. I think it’ll evolve into a more 
YARN oriented world where resources are managed and shared.
In your opinion, what is something that everyone is doing 
wrong?
I just came back from spending a lot of time with some large enterprises, and 
I’d say the biggest mistake is treating Big Data as a vendor selection process. 
Some company hears about Big Data and competitive business hype around it. 
Then they go “Ok, I need to go buy more Big Data widgets for my IT department 
and then I’ll be doing Big Data”. By contrast, where people are successful 
with big data is when they have a clear agenda and an business opportunity to 
leverage Big Data. Now, if you don’t have any familiarity with the technology, 
you might need to explore and experiment on where to apply the technology. 
But there is a lot of noise coming from the vendor community who want to sell 
their products (which is understandable), and they have an agenda to position 
a product as “solving a certain problem”. But in reality, in order to get to that 
point where you realize value, there is a lot to be done beyond the vendor 
products. Therefore the correct approach is to treat Big Data as a strategic 
investment in capabilities that are now viable, because these architectures 
allow you to do different things. What I see folks doing wrong is that they treat 
it as yet another vendor selection process in the IT department, but fail to 
relate that decision back to business objectives and imperatives.

--- PAGE 17 ---
So if you’re just trying to buy “Big Data” without knowing what 
to do with it, you’re basically wasting money?
Well, of course you can learn things from experimentation. But if you don’t 
learn where to point it, you’ll be stuck with only some intangible value. People 
seem to get into a state of analysis paralysis where they’ve spent some time 
playing with Big Data, but still don’t understand where to point it. We’re doing 
a fine business called Data Strategy and Architecture Advisory, which helps 
you answer the question of “what should my organization be doing with my 
data and what does that mean in terms of required technology and capability 
investment?” This offering stemmed from our observation of the current state 
of affairs in the industry.
From your personal experience, what are you most excited 
about? This could be about technology, trend, or people.
What I’ve always thought was so exciting was the opportunity to bring data 
and insight to decisions that have traditionally been made based on gut instinct 
and personal experience. I think when we take Big Data to the larger industrial 
and economic space, there will be opportunities for systematic improvements 
such as preventative and proactive scheduled maintenance. This applies 
everywhere from smart farming, to smart power distribution grids, to smart 
supply chains. This will have a profound affect on the economy in a perhaps 
less “sexy” way when compared to the consumer technology innovations (such 
as personalization etc). This is not to take away from the consumer technology. 
But when I think about the industrial enterprise context, I get really excited. 
Big Data gives us a new visibility to the parts of the world that have the most 
impact on people’s lives.
In your opinion, what is the most fascinating use of data 
science that your team has accomplished at SVDS?
I’ll give you a couple of general example and then a few specific ones to paint 
you a clear picture.
We’ve spent a lot of time advising customers starting with the imperatives 
of their businesses; what can we do to take those objectives, map them to 
the technology and capabilities they need, and help them understand how 
to apply them. For example, we’re working with a pharmaceutical client who 
is starting to take some Big Data approaches to their R&D department. It’s 
15

--- PAGE 18 ---
an exciting opportunity to introduce these approaches into an industry that 
has yet to adopt them widely.  Another example is when we did some work 
with Edmunds.com (who kindly let us talk about it). We helped them build 
a pipeline of unstructured data that describes the features and options on 
new vehicles. So when BMW releases a new 4-series, it’ll send over various 
extensive 400-pages PDF documents that describe all possible configurations 
for the car. Edmunds had a team of folks who focused on manually configuring 
data models to support the searches for relevant information (so the customer 
can run searches like “German coupe with a hefty engine”). The process used 
to take weeks, now it takes 1-2 days.
Specifically, the capability here is implementing Idibon (a NLP startup) into 
a data pipeline and building applications that would allow the customer to 
successfully exploit that capability. This is a combination of working with Big 
Data capabilities to bring new technology, coupling it with a robust processing 
pipeline that ingest lots of unstructured data, and chunking it up and feeding 
it to an classifier / entity resolver. The result is a process that changes the way 
in which the client does business. To my earlier comments, if you treat this 
as a vendor selection process, you might get a component of it, but you you’ll 
struggle to come up with the specific working solution.
But when you treat this as an end problem and understand it as the road 
map to capability, it becomes profound. So now Edmunds has the capability to 
point at customers’ reviews and start to get an understanding for things such 
as sentiment analysis. Now when you see a user like a BMW X5, you understand 
whether if it’s because the user likes the styling, the handling, or the speed. So 
now the understanding of preference for style and features becomes another 
game changer enabled by the first innovation. This in turn can lead to other 
different useful results for the organization.
Given that SVDS is a niche Data Consulting firm, can you 
speak to how different it is to work there as a consulting data 
scientist versus working as a full time hired data scientist at a 
larger organization such as Google?
One is not better than the other, but there are important differences. There 
are people who are suited for one and not suited for the other. The benefit of 
working as a consultant is that we’re able to go on a project (using a real example 
here) where they’re building the capability to get a unified picture of inventory 
16

--- PAGE 19 ---
across warehouses and retail stores. This involves heavy engineering, but also 
data science since people put stuff in their shopping carts and inventory is 
never where you think it is. As a result you need to understand the probabilistic 
aspect of the problem and things such as time to fulfill order based on the 
location of its destination etc.
So with us you might work on that for 3 months, but the next project might 
be optimizing interventions for a healthcare company [what are the best 
interventions to get a diabetic to adhere to the treatment regimen and regularly 
test the blood sugar level etc.] These are very different problem spaces. Of course 
they might leverage similar technology, but if you’re curious about exploring 
different problems (and want to be at the forefront of that exploration), you 
get to see that variety with us. On the other hand, other people might instead 
want to get on the LinkedIn’s famous “People You May Know” team. Certain 
aspects of that problem were solved a long time ago, and I imagine that the 
approach has remained relatively consistent. So of course you’ll be working 
on the long tail of small incremental improvements. Some people love getting 
very, very deep into a problem like that.
We provide premium services to companies, and that means we have to lead 
the market in terms of the technologies we work with and how we implement 
them. For example, we currently work a lot with Spark. We’ve got Spark in 
production for a major US retailer over the holidays [Fall/Winter of 2014] 
and that’s a pretty novel thing. Since we demand a premium in the market 
place due to our team and capabilities, learning these new technologies and 
capabilities is existential for us. We dedicate a lot of time to training our team 
and exploring that space.
In a large or more mature product organization, you might be 1 of the 20 
people working on the Hadoop cluster (which you’ll learn a lot), versus with 
us you’ll be 1 of the 4 people who bring Hadoop to a new use case that has 
never done before. Of course, people learn differently and some people might 
do better in the first scenario. The fun thing is that we get to interact with the 
people doing similar things on those teams at product companies a lot, and we 
have a lot mutual respect for each other. It’s just different strokes for different 
folks, as they say.
17

--- PAGE 20 ---
18
MAT T MCMANUS
VP OF ENGINEERING AT DATAMEER
MAT T has been building enterprise software products for over 10 years with 
deep experience in architecture, software engineering and team management 
roles. He is currently the VP of Engineering at Datameer, an end-to-end big 
data analytics application for Hadoop.

--- PAGE 21 ---
19
Does Datameer recruit people without much work experience, 
i.e. recent college graduates?  What is a downfall that you tend 
to see in these types of applicants?
Yes we do.  We have a major engineering office in Germany, so we do a lot of 
recruiting in that area.  There are some special programs in Germany where 
you can get a masters working at a company.  One of the major downfalls is 
when you work closely with students, you get a lot of the academic problems 
which is nice, but the biggest gap we’re missing with those folks are software 
engineering skills.  Actually being able to build products, think from a user 
perspective, direct your ability to do data analysis and implement great features 
with the focus on actually generating a product.  We find we have to spend a lot 
of time with these people coming up to speed on general software engineering 
practices, usability, and delivering real product features.  We have a pretty 
varied level of experience when it comes to working with these people.  It’s 
a different thing implement something in a side project than implementing 
a new feature on a full on enterprise product.  Some people come on and pick 
this up fast and others don’t.  The biggest challenge is finding folks that have 
thought from an application and product perspective.
What’s the best way to gain these skills?
Just doing it.  It’s interesting to see work on a project that is incorporated 
into a product, a user-facing interface, or a data visualization.  When you’re 
thinking a little bit above the algorithmic level, like how can this help a user or 
product.  I think an internship where you’re working on products and working 
with the software engineering part of it.  There are a lot of people that come 
out of school that can do the math and the stats, but being in the line of fire 
how do you write code that can be maintained, worked on with a lot people, and 
delivered as a feature. 
What type of tools do you use at Datameer?
We are one of the first native Hadoop analytics platforms.  We recently 
abstracted ourselves a layer above the hadoop so now we can integrate with any 
type of execution framework, like Spark.  We have a product that sits on top 
of a hadoop environment.  We integrate pretty nicely with the entire Hadoop 
ecosystem. 
Do you expect applicants to know Hadoop when they are 
applying to a position at Datameer?

--- PAGE 22 ---
20
Not necessarily.  You have to show basic CS level competency, so distributed 
algorithms.  In general, we find Hadoop is kind of easy, and as far as an API 
goes MapReduce is not that complex.  If you can prove that you understand the 
distributed and algorithmic concepts, and have experience on a project that is 
user facing application that’s good enough.  We can teach you the Hadoop API 
if we need to.
Are the terms data scientist and data engineer mutually 
exclusive or do expect people to have a background in both 
statistics and software engineering?
I think some of our ideal candidates have both.  What I’m seeing is that data 
literacy is very important.  We’re not looking for Machine Learning researchers, 
but having some background in statistics and data science is very important for 
our product.  We look for a sweet spot where you have a statistics background 
and have experience in software engineering.  
In terms of your product, do you think it’s important for data 
analyst to pay attention to upcoming technologies like Spark 
when your product is supposed to abstract away these issues?
If you’re looking to get hired by us on the engineering side you definitely 
have to pay attention to these new technologies.  If you want to get a job with 
one of our customers doing the analysis, there is going to be a proliferation 
of tools coming to you, to put you into that position.  We sell into people who 
want to do the analysis.  We sell into armies of data scientists that don’t want 
to write code, they want to think about the data and they need to tools to do 
what they do.  
What is a trend you see with the company’s adopting 
datameer?  Who is the most hungry to analyze their data?
We have a wide variety across regions.  On the east coast, we have a big 
interest in finance.  All the big banks are building out massive hadoop clusters. 
They are doing lots of customer analytics, fraud detection, and these are 
viewed as traditional big data issues.  On the west coast we have emerging 
companies in gaming, internet, mobile that are using newer technologies to 
create data products.  So on the east coast, there is a more traditional use of 
this information whereas on the west coast we’re seeing new companies use 
data in new ways.

--- PAGE 23 ---
21
JOHN SCHUSTER
VP OF ENGINEERING AT PLATFORA
JOHN is currently the Vice President of Engineering at Platfora.  He leads a 
team of engineers in building a Hadoop native Big Data Analytics platform for 
organizations to use to analyze their data seamlessly.

--- PAGE 24 ---
22
What is the typical interview process for a data engineering 
position at Platfora?  What are you looking for in a candidate? 
At Platfora, we have a pretty defined interview process.  Usually, we meet 
candidates two or three times.  Sometimes just the hiring manager will meet 
with candidate at first and decide if it makes sense to proceed to a first round 
interview and then a second round interview.  Typically, the interview team sizes 
are about 6 to 8 people total, in some cases a little bit more for senior positions. 
For entry level positions, it would probably be around 6.  There are actually a 
few different profiles.  There is a software engineer who is programming and 
building products that process data in some way.  The skillset required is a 
computer science background.  Systems and parallel programming are big 
pluses.  Some of the modern technologies like Hadoop as well.
A different profile is a Data Scientist who uses the product to analyze and 
understand the data.  It’s a totally different skillset like mathematics, statistics, 
and machine learning.
Do you expect an engineering to have a statistical 
background?  Afterall, they are building a product that data 
scientists will use.
It’s definitely a plus.  It depends on what part of the product that the engineer 
is working on.  For example, at Platfora, there is a distributed query engine. 
The people who are working on the distributed query engine know a lot about 
parallel programming, MPP databases, and data processing in general.  There 
are other engineers who are working on other parts of our system who might 
not be considered data engineers, but rather engineers working on a data 
related product.
Can you give us an example of an industry product that a data 
engineer at Platfora would work on?  Can you describe the 
process like who they report to and what tools they use?
The way that I have the engineering team organized, is that there is a server 
team which handles that master worker architecture and all the software that 
runs in that cluster.  I also have a front end team which is handling our web 
application which is our interface to how you administer, configure, and use the 
product analyze the data.  Our third team is the Automation, QA, and testing 
team.  Those three teams together work in conjunction to build our product. 
Some of the tools we use GIRA for bug tracking for .  A lot of engineers use intellij 

--- PAGE 25 ---
as their development environment.  We use stash and git for source control. 
We have a whole bunch of internally written scripts and different pieces of 
automation that build and test the product in a continuous integration sense.  
Employers are always saying that they’re looking for side 
projects that a candidate has done that relates to the product 
they are trying to build. Do you agree with this notion?
Personally, I am not very focused on projects.  I am focused on the interview 
process for entry level positions.  I believe in hiring really strong software 
engineers.  It would be unusual that someone without much work experience 
to have done the exact right project that I’m looking to hire someone for. 
However, what I can say, there are certain projects that are nice to see on 
resumes.  If someone has done something with hadoop or hadoop ecosystem 
technologies, such as MapReduce, Spark or Hive. Anyone of those would be an 
indicator that the person is interested in data or likes data processing. Again, 
it’s not a requirement. Another example that has nothing to do with Hadoop 
or Apache, would just be general database experience and distributed systems 
experience.  
Once data platforms gets powerful enough, will data related 
issues be abstracted away from the user?
That doesn’t feel right to me.  The more knowledge that an analyst has about 
the data the more effective he or she is going to be. I don’t really believe that 
any products today are anywhere near where you don’t need to understand the 
actual data, the structure of the data, and the problems with the data.
I believe the growth in big data and specifically big data analytics will be in 
the top of the stack, or the application layer.  We’ve spent the last 5 to 8 years 
building the infrastructure to process big data.  There are lots of great tools 
and technologies available on the market today.  Typically when that happens, 
all that stuff in the infrastructure layer gets commoditized and people start 
building applications on top of it.  I think that’s the phase that we are currently 
in and that’s where I see the biggest growth being in big data in the next 5 
years.
Any advice you would like to add for someone interested in 
getting involved in the industry?
I’ve gotten all my best opportunities through professors and former bosses 
and colleagues.  So building those relationships, and doing exceptionally well 
to get noticed is the main piece of advice I have.
23

--- PAGE 26 ---
24
TOM DAVENPORT
PROFESSOR AT BABSON COLLEGE AND AUTHOR 
OF BIG DATA @ WORK
TOM is a world renowned thought leader on business analytics and big data. 
He is the President’s Distinguished Professor of Information Technology and 
Management at Babson College, and the co-founder and Director of Research 
at the International Institute for Analytics.

--- PAGE 27 ---
25
It seems like in your book, you are very optimistic about Big 
Data and the advancements it will have in the world.  There 
is an interesting point that Michael Jordan, a professor at UC 
Berkeley, brought up.  He thinks that Big Data will return a lot 
false positives in the future.  He parallels it to having a billion 
Monkey’s typing at once, one of them will write Shakespeare.  
How serious is this concern for the future?
It’s certainly true that if you are only looking at measures of statistical 
significance, working with Big Data is going to generate a lot of false positives 
because by definition a certain percentage are going to be significant.  Some 
of those are going to make sense and some of them aren’t.  If all you’re using 
is Machine Learning to generate statistically significant relationships among 
variables, that statement is true.  I think it’s one of the reasons why you need 
to use a little judgement about whether or not that finding makes sense and is 
there anything we can do with it.  I think given the vast amount of data, we have 
to use Machine Learning, but I generally advocate that it’s still accompanied by 
some human analyst who can help make sense of the outcomes.
In your book, you describe futuristic scenarios.  Do you think 
it’s as realistic to foresee major examples of disaster from the 
use of Big Data?  
I think there are different levels of negative outcomes.  There is the level of 
producing marketing offers that are not accurate and well-targeted.  We all 
experience that everyday.  It’s no great tragedy and it wastes our time to get all 
this crap.  So that’s the benign but negative outcome.  Then there’s the more 
troublesome negative outcome around data; security and privacy breaches.  We 
know that happens a fair amount, and it might happen even more, unless we 
take some dramatic steps to address it.  The thing that I am most worried about 
is that various types of intelligent machines are going to replace fairly expert 
and well-educated knowledge workers in doing their jobs.  I find that to be a 
scary prospect.  These knowledge workers can augment the work of intelligent 
machines as opposed to be out of a job because of them.  I’m not personally 
worried about AI taking over taking over humanity, but there are some quite 
smart people who are.  I don’t lose much sleep over it, but I do worry about loss 
of jobs.
In the case of Machine Learning tools replacing knowledge 

--- PAGE 28 ---
26
workers.  How should one educate him or herself on Big Data 
to avoid something like this occurring, or to avoid the mistakes 
that could occur from the use of Big Data and Machine 
Learning techniques?
I think if you are a highly quantitative person, then there is one course of action 
and that means understanding how these algorithms and meta-algorithms 
work.  Knowing their limitations, understanding what the assumptions are 
behind them, knowing when the models need to be reexamined, and so on.  If 
you are not a quantitative person and it’s not a viable prospect to engage with 
the machine in a serious way, then I think you have to find something that a 
machine is not very good at. There are still a fair number of those, so you need to 
focus on that kind of thing.  Maybe specialize very narrowly in something that 
nobody would ever write and automated system for.  Focus on something that 
machines aren’t good at like persuading humans to change their behavior as 
opposed to coming up with the right answer.  I think, in many cases, computers 
are going to be better at coming up with the right answer.  However, persuading 
people to act on that answer is a matter of clinical psychology.  You could focus 
on persuading people to change their behavior.  Even sales, you could call an 
example of that.  You either have to either engage with the machines, or find 
something that they can’t do very well, and make that your focus.
In terms of Big Data education for professionals, what area is 
lacking the most: implementation or management?
The number one area that companies complain about in terms of the people 
they hire is the poor ability to communicate about analytics.  If we are going 
to be successful getting organizations to change the way they make decisions, 
you not only have to do the analytics, but you have to persuade someone to 
adopt a new way of thinking based on the data and analysis.  I think the area 
that education is most lacking is on the communication side.
What is a good way to build up the ability to communicate 
technical concepts?
I think you have to think a lot about the time-honored practice of storytelling: 
what makes for a good story and what kind of story you’re trying to tell.  I 
wrote about this in Keeping Up With the Quants and classified different kinds 
of analytical stories.  You have to make sure the story is one that appeals to 
your audience.  If it’s a highly technical audience then you can tell a highly 

--- PAGE 29 ---
technical story, but chances are good it’s going to be a non-technical audience. 
If this is the case, you have to use language that resonates with that specific 
audience.  If you’re in business, then it’s mostly going to be a language of ROI, 
conversion, lift, and things that people are familiar with in that context.  You 
have to spend a lot time thinking of a clever way of communicating your idea. 
Use all the tools of storytelling, like metaphors and analogies, and provide as 
many examples of possible.  Unfortunately, I don’t think there is a lot content 
out there about how to communicate effectively about analytics.  I heard this 
week about an organization, a large academic medical center, whose Chief 
Analytics Officer hired former journalists to do the communication.  So you 
could imagine we have some division of labor so the people who are really good 
at communicating, like a journalist, could take some of the load off the analysts 
themselves.  Let’s face it, it’s hard to find to people who are both a talented 
analyst and a talented communicator.  
In the process of creating the Big Data @ Work, was there a 
Big Data anecdote or story you learned that was the most 
exciting thing about what Big Data can revolutionize?
There are a number of cases where Big Data is beginning to transform 
industries.  GE is transforming industrial equipment, Schneider transforming 
trucking, UPS transforming shipping, Monsanto transforming agriculture. 
It’s a really exciting prospect that we have these companies that are making 
expensive bets that have potential to dramatically transform how the industry 
operates and doing good for the world in the process.  GE is very focused 
on how we can lower energy consumption for gas turbines, jet engines, etc. 
Monsanto is trying to figure out how we’re going to feed nine billion people. 
UPS has already cut their energy uses and carbon creation.  They have saved 
half a billion this year with their Big Data and analytics approaches for driver 
routing.  It’s all incredibly exciting.  There is a huge amount of potential, but 
also a lot of work to realize.
 
27

--- PAGE 30 ---
LEARN INSIGHT IN DATA
http://www.teamleada.com/

