--- PAGE 1 ---
The Skills, Tools, and Perspectives 
Behind Great Data Science Groups
DJ Patil
Building Data 
Science Teams

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
  
 
www.asterdata.com
THE SIMPLEST WAY TO BRING
MapReduce and SQL
Optimized in One Database Appliance
- Jonathan Goldman, Director of Analytics, Teradata Aster
  (and former Principal Data Scientist at LinkedIn)
Everyone knows data is the new black. The Aster MapReduce 
Analytics Portfolio enables customers to quickly make use of 
their data for actionable insights, analysis and product innovation.
 www.Asterdata.com/MapReduce     
Learn More

--- PAGE 3 ---
Make Data Work
strataconf.com
Presented by O’Reilly and Cloudera, 
Strata + Hadoop World is where 
cutting-edge data science and new 
business fundamentals intersect—
and merge.
n Learn business applications of 
data technologies
n Develop new skills through 
trainings and in-depth tutorials
n Connect with an international 
community of thousands who 
work with data
Job # 15420

--- PAGE 4 ---
Building Data Science Teams
DJ Patil
Beijing • Cambridge • Farnham • Köln • Sebastopol • Tokyo

--- PAGE 5 ---
Building Data Science Teams
by DJ Patil
Copyright © 2011 O’Reilly Media. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol,
CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional
use. Online editions are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribookson
line.com). For more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales depart-
ment: (800) 998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Mike Loukides
Printing History:
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their
products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book,
and O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have
been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher
and authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages re-
sulting from the use of the information contained herein.
ISBN: 978-1-449-31623-5
1316117207

--- PAGE 6 ---
Table of Contents
Building Data Science Teams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Being Data Driven
2
The Roles of a Data Scientist
5
Decision sciences and business intelligence
5
Product and marketing analytics
7
Fraud, abuse, risk and security
8
Data services and operations
9
Data engineering and infrastructure
9
Organizational and reporting alignment
10
What Makes a Data Scientist?
11
Hiring and talent
14
Building the LinkedIn Data Science Team
16
Reinvention
18
About the Author
18
iii

--- PAGE 7 ---

--- PAGE 8 ---
Building Data Science Teams
Starting in 2008, Jeff Hammerbacher (@hackingdata) and I sat down to share
our experiences building the data and analytics groups at Facebook and Link-
edIn. In many ways, that meeting was the start of data science as a distinct
professional 
specialization 
(see 
“What 
Makes 
a 
Data 
Scien-
tist?” on page 11 for the story on how we came up with the title “Data Sci-
entist”). Since then, data science has taken on a life of its own. The hugely
positive response to “What Is Data Science?,” a great introduction to the
meaning of data science in today’s world, showed that we were at the start of
a movement. There are now regular meetups, well-established startups, and
even college curricula focusing on data science. As McKinsey’s big data re-
search report and LinkedIn’s data indicates indicates (see Figure 1), data sci-
ence talent is in high demand.
This increase in the demand for data scientists has been driven by the success
of the major Internet companies. Google, Facebook, LinkedIn, and Amazon
have all made their marks by using data creatively: not just warehousing data,
but turning it into something of value. Whether that value is a search result, a
targeted advertisement, or a list of possible acquaintances, data science is pro-
ducing products that people want and value. And it’s not just Internet com-
panies: Walmart doesn’t produce “data products” as such, but they’re well
known for using data to optimize every aspect of their retail operations.
Given how important data science has grown, it’s important to think about
what data scientists add to an organization, how they fit in, and how to hire
and build effective data science teams.
1

--- PAGE 9 ---
Being Data Driven
Everyone wants to build a data-driven organization. It’s a popular phrase and
there are plenty of books, journals, and technical blogs on the topic. But what
does it really mean to be “data driven”? My definition is:
A data-driven organization acquires, processes, and leverages data in a timely
fashion to create efficiencies, iterate on and develop new products, and navigate
the competitive landscape.
There are many ways to assess whether an organization is data driven. Some
like to talk about how much data they generate. Others like to talk about the
sophistication of data they use, or the process of internalizing data. I prefer to
start by highlighting organizations that use data effectively.
Figure 1. The rise in demand for data science talent
2 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ecommerce companies have a long history of using data to benefit their or-
ganizations. Any good salesman instinctively knows how to suggest further
purchases to a customer. With “People who viewed this item also viewed ...,”
Amazon moved this technique online. This simple implementation of collab-
orative filtering is one of their most used features; it is a powerful mechanism
for serendipity outside of traditional search. This feature has become so pop-
ular that there are now variants such as “People who viewed this item
bought ... .” If a customer isn’t quite satisfied with the product he’s looking
at, suggest something similar that might be more to his taste. The value to a
master retailer is obvious: close the deal if at all possible, and instead of a single
purchase, get customers to make two or more purchases by suggesting things
they’re likely to want. Amazon revolutionized electronic commerce by bring-
ing these techniques online.
Data products are at the heart of social networks. After all, what is a social
network if not a huge dataset of users with connections to each other, forming
a graph? Perhaps the most important product for a social network is something
to help users connect with others. Any new user needs to find friends, ac-
quaintances, or contacts. It’s not a good user experience to force users to search
for their friends, which is often a surprisingly difficult task. At LinkedIn, we
invented People You May Know (PYMK) to solve this problem. It’s easy for
software to predict that if James knows Mary, and Mary knows John Smith,
then James may know John Smith. (Well, conceptually easy. Finding connec-
tions in graphs gets tough quickly as the endpoints get farther apart. But solv-
ing that problem is what data scientists are for.) But imagine searching for John
Smith by name on a network with hundreds of millions of users!
Although PYMK was novel at the time, it has become a critical part of every
social network’s offering. Facebook not only supports its own version of
PYMK, they monitor the time it takes for users to acquire friends. Using so-
phisticated tracking and analysis technologies, they have identified the time
and number of connections it takes to get a user to long-term engagement. If
you connect with a few friends, or add friends slowly, you won’t stick around
for long. By studying the activity levels that lead to commitment, they have
designed the site to decrease the time it takes for new users to connect with
the critical number of friends.
Netflix does something similar in their online movie business. When you sign
up, they strongly encourage you to add to the queue of movies you intend to
watch. Their data team has discovered that once you add more than than a
certain number of movies, the probability you will be a long-term customer is
significantly higher. With this data, Netflix can construct, test, and monitor
product flows to maximize the number of new users who exceed the magic
number and become long-term customers. They’ve built a highly optimized
Being Data Driven | 3

--- PAGE 11 ---
registration/trial service that leverages this information to engage the user
quickly and efficiently.
Netflix, LinkedIn, and Facebook aren’t alone in using customer data to en-
courage long-term engagement — Zynga isn’t just about games. Zynga con-
stantly monitors who their users are and what they are doing, generating an
incredible amount of data in the process. By analyzing how people interact
with a game over time, they have identified tipping points that lead to a suc-
cessful game. They know how the probability that users will become long-term
changes based on the number of interactions they have with others, the num-
ber of buildings they build in the first n days, the number of mobsters they kill
in the first m hours, etc. They have figured out the keys to the engagement
challenge and have built their product to encourage users to reach those goals.
Through continued testing and monitoring, they refined their understanding
of these key metrics.
Google and Amazon pioneered the use of A/B testing to optimize the layout
of a web page. For much of the web’s history, web designers worked by intu-
ition and instinct. There’s nothing wrong with that, but if you make a change
to a page, you owe it to yourself to ensure that the change is effective. Do you
sell more product? How long does it take for users to find the result they’re
looking for? How many users give up and go to another site? These questions
can only be answered by experimenting, collecting the data, and doing the
analysis, all of which are second nature to a data-driven company.
Yahoo has made many important contributions to data science. After observ-
ing Google’s use of MapReduce to analyze huge datasets, they realized that
they needed similar tools for their own business. The result was Hadoop, now
one of the most important tools in any data scientist’s repertoire. Hadoop has
since been commercialized by Cloudera, Hortonworks (a Yahoo spin-off),
MapR, and several other companies. Yahoo didn’t stop with Hadoop; they
have observed the importance of streaming data, an application that Hadoop
doesn’t handle well, and are working on an open source tool called S4 (still in
the early stages) to handle streams effectively.
Payment services, such as PayPal, Visa, American Express, and Square, live
and die by their abilities to stay one step ahead of the bad guys. To do so, they
use sophisticated fraud detection systems to look for abnormal patterns in
incoming data. These systems must be able to react in milliseconds, and their
models need to be updated in real time as additional data becomes available.
It amounts to looking for a needle in a haystack while the workers keep piling
on more hay. We’ll go into more details about fraud and security later in this
article.
4 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 12 ---
Google and other search engines constantly monitor search relevance metrics
to identify areas where people are trying to game the system or where tuning
is required to provide a better user experience. The challenge of moving and
processing data on Google’s scale is immense, perhaps larger than any other
company today. To support this challenge, they have had to invent novel
technical solutions that range from hardware (e.g., custom computers) to soft-
ware (e.g., MapReduce) to algorithms (PageRank), much of which has now
percolated into open source software projects.
I’ve found that the strongest data-driven organizations all live by the motto “if
you can’t measure it, you can’t fix it” (a motto I learned from one of the best
operations people I’ve worked with). This mindset gives you a fantastic ability
to deliver value to your company by:
• Instrumenting and collecting as much data as you can. Whether you’re
doing business intelligence or building products, if you don’t collect the
data, you can’t use it.
• Measuring in a proactive and timely way. Are your products, and strategies
succeeding? If you don’t measure the results, how do you know?
• Getting many people to look at data. Any problems that may be present
will become obvious more quickly — “with enough eyes all bugs are shal-
low.”
• Fostering increased curiosity about why the data has changed or is not
changing. In a data-driven organization, everyone is thinking about the
data.
It’s easy to pretend that you’re data driven. But if you get into the mindset to
collect and measure everything you can, and think about what the data you’ve
collected means, you’ll be ahead of most of the organizations that claim to be
data driven. And while I have a lot to say about professional data scientists
later in this post, keep in mind that data isn’t just for the professionals. Ev-
eryone should be looking at the data.
The Roles of a Data Scientist
In every organization I’ve worked with or advised, I’ve always found that data
scientists have an influence out of proportion to their numbers. The many roles
that data scientists can play fall into the following domains.
Decision sciences and business intelligence
Data has long played a role in advising and assisting operational and strategic
thinking. One critical aspect of decision-making support is defining, monitor-
The Roles of a Data Scientist | 5

--- PAGE 13 ---
ing, and reporting on key metrics. While that may sound easy, there is a real
art to defining metrics that help a business better understand its “levers and
control knobs.” Poorly-chosen metrics can lead to blind spots. Furthermore,
metrics must always be used in context with each other. For example, when
looking at percentages, it is still important to see the raw numbers. It is also
essential that metrics evolve as the sophistication of the business increases. As
an analogy, imagine a meteorologist who can only measure temperature. This
person’s forecast is always going to be of lower quality than the meteorologist
who knows how to measure air pressure. And the meteorologist who knows
how to use humidity will do even better, and so on.
Once metrics and reporting are established, the dissemination of data is es-
sential. There’s a wide array of tools for publishing data, ranging from simple
spreadsheets and web forms, to more sophisticated business intelligence prod-
ucts. As tools get more sophisticated, they typically add the ability to annotate
and manipulate (e.g., pivot with other data elements) to provide additional
insights.
More sophisticated data-driven organizations thrive on the “democratiza-
tion” of data. Data isn’t just the property of an analytics group or senior man-
agement. Everyone should have access to as much data as legally possible.
Facebook has been a pioneer in this area. They allow anyone to query the
company’s massive Hadoop-based data store using a language called Hive.
This way, nearly anyone can create a personal dashboard by running scripts
at regular intervals. Zynga has built something similar, using a completely
different set of technologies. They have two copies of their data warehouses.
One copy is used for operations where there are strict service-level agree-
ments (SLA) in place to ensure reports and key metrics are always accessible.
The other data store can be accessed by many people within the company,
with the understanding that performance may not be always optimal. A more
traditional model is used by eBay, which uses technologies like Teradata to
create cubes of data for each team. These cubes act like self-contained datasets
and data stores that the teams can interact with.
As organizations have become increasingly adept with reporting and analysis,
there has been increased demand for strategic decision-making using data. We
have been calling this new area “decision sciences.” These teams delve into
existing data sources and meld them with external data sources to understand
the competitive landscape, prioritize strategy and tactics, and provide clarity
about hypotheses that may arise during strategic planning. A decision sciences
team might take on a problem, like which country to expand into next, or it
might investigate whether a particular market is saturated. This analysis might,
for example, require mixing census data with internal data and then building
6 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 14 ---
predictive models that can be tested against existing data or data that needs to
be acquired.
One word of caution: people new to data science frequently look for a “silver
bullet,” some magic number around which they can build their entire system.
If you find it, fantastic, but few are so lucky. The best organizations look for
levers that they can lean on to maximize utility, and then move on to find
additional levers that increase the value of their business.
Product and marketing analytics
Product analytics represents a relatively new use of data. Teams create appli-
cations that interact directly with customers, such as:
• Products that provide highly personalized content (e.g., the ordering/
ranking of information in a news feed).
• Products that help drive the company’s value proposition (e.g., “People
You May Know” and other applications that suggest friends or other types
of connections).
• Products that facilitate the introduction into other products (e.g., “Groups
You May Like,” which funnels you into LinkedIn’s Groups product area).
• Products that prevent dead ends (e.g., collaborative filters that suggest
further purchases, such as Amazon’s “People who viewed this item also
viewed ...”).
Products that are stand alone (e.g., news relevancy products like Google
News, LinkedIn Today, etc.).
Given the rapidly decreasing cost of computation, it is easier than ever to use
common algorithms and numerical techniques to test the effectiveness of these
products.
Similar to product analytics, marketing analytics uses data to explain and
showcase a service or product’s value proposition. A great example of mar-
keting analytics is OKCupid’s blog, which uses internal and external data
sources to discuss larger trends. For example, one well-known post correlates
the number of sexual partners with smartphone brands. Do iPhone users have
more fun? OKCupid knows. Another post studied what kinds of profile pic-
tures are attractive, based on the number of new contacts they generated. In
addition to a devoted following, these blog posts are regularly picked up by
traditional media, and shared virally through social media channels. The result
is a powerful marketing tactic that drives both new users and returning users.
Other companies that have used data to drive blogging as a marketing strategy
include Mint, LinkedIn, Facebook, and Uber.
The Roles of a Data Scientist | 7

--- PAGE 15 ---
Email has long been the basis for online communication with current and
potential customers. Using analytics as a part of an email targeting strategy is
not new, but powerful analytical technologies can help to create email mar-
keting programs that provide rich content. For example, LinkedIn periodically
sends customers updates about changes to their networks: new jobs, signifi-
cant posts, new connections. This would be spam if it were just a LinkedIn
advertisement. But it isn’t — it’s relevant information about people you al-
ready know. Similarly, Facebook uses email to encourage you to come back
to the site if you have been inactive. Those emails highlight the activity of your
most relevant friends. Since it is hard to delete an email that tells you what
your friends are up to, it’s extremely effective.
Fraud, abuse, risk and security
Online criminals don’t want to be found. They try to hide in the data. There
are several key components in the constantly evolving war between attackers
and defenders: data collection, detection, mitigation, and forensics. The skills
of data scientists are well suited to all of these components.
Any strategy for preventing and detecting fraud and abuse starts with data
collection. Data collection is always a challenge, and it is tough to decide how
much instrumentation is sufficient. Attackers are always looking to exploit the
limitations of your data, but constraints such as cost and storage capacity mean
that it’s usually impossible to collect all the data you’d like. The ability to
recognize which data needs to be collected is essential. There’s an inevitable
“if only” moment during an attack: “if only we had collected x and y, we’d be
able to see what is going on.”
Another aspect of incident response is the time required to process data. If an
attack is evolving minute by minute, but your processing layer takes hours to
analyze the data, you won’t be able to respond effectively. Many organizations
are finding that they need data scientists, along with sophisticated tooling, to
process and analyze data quickly enough to act on it.
Once the attack is understood, the next phase is mitigation. Mitigation usually
requires closing an exploit or developing a model that segments bad users from
good users. Success in this area requires the ability to take existing data and
transform it into new variables that can be acted upon. This is a subtle but
critical point. As an example, consider IP addresses. Any logging infrastructure
almost certainly collects the IP addresses that connect to your site. Addresses
by themselves are of limited use. However, an IP address can be transformed
into variables such as:
• The number of bad actors seen from this address during some period of
time.
8 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 16 ---
• The country from which the address originated, and other geographic in-
formation.
• Whether the address is typical for this time of day.
From this data, we now have derived variables that can be built into a model
for an actionable result. Domain experts who are data scientists understand
how to make variables out of the data. And from those variables, you can build
detectors to find the bad guys.
Finally, forensics builds a case against the attackers and helps you learn about
the true nature of the attack and how to prevent (or limit) such attacks in the
future. Forensics can be a time-consuming process where the data scientists
sift through all of the data to piece together a puzzle. Once the puzzle has been
put together, new tooling, processes, and monitoring can be put in place.
Data services and operations
One of the foundational components of any data organization is data services
and operations. This team is responsible for the databases, data stores, data
structures (e.g., data schemas), and the data warehouse. They are also respon-
sible for the monitoring and upkeep of these systems. The other functional
areas cannot exist without a top-notch data services and operations group; you
could even say that the other areas live on top of this area. In some organiza-
tions, these teams exist independently of traditional operations teams. In my
opinion, as these systems increase in sophistication, they need even greater
coordination with operations groups. The systems and services this functional
area provides need to be deployed in traditional data centers or in the cloud,
and they need to be monitored for stability; staff also must be on hand to
respond when systems go down. Established operations groups have expertise
in these areas, and it makes sense to take advantage of such skills.
As an organization builds out its reporting requirements, the data services and
operations team should become responsible for the reporting layer. While
team members may not focus on defining metrics, they are critical in ensuring
that the reports are delivered in a timely manner. Therefore, collaboration
between data services and decision sciences is absolutely essential. For exam-
ple, while a metric may be easy to define on paper, implementing it as part of
a regular report may be unrealistic: the database queries required to implement
the metric may be too complex to run as frequently as needed.
Data engineering and infrastructure
It’s hard to understate the sophistication of the tools needed to instrument,
track, move, and process data at scale. The development and implementation
The Roles of a Data Scientist | 9

--- PAGE 17 ---
of these technologies is the responsibility of the data engineering and infra-
structure team. The technologies have evolved tremendously over the past
decade, with an incredible amount of collaboration taking place through open
source projects. Here are just a few samples:
• Kafka, Flume, and Scribe are tools for streaming data collection. While
the models differ, the general idea is that these programs collect data from
many sources; aggregate the data; and feed it to a database, a system like
Hadoop, or other clients.
• Hadoop is currently the most widely used framework for processing data.
Hadoop is an open source implementation of the MapReduce program-
ming model that Google popularized in 2004. It is inherently batch-ori-
ented; several newer technologies are aimed at processing streaming data,
such as S4 and Storm.
• Azkaban and Oozie are job schedulers. They manage and coordinate
complex data flows.
• Pig and Hive are languages for querying large non-relational datastores.
Hive is very similar to SQL. Pig is a data-oriented scripting language.
• Voldemort, Cassandra, and HBase are data stores that have been designed
for good performance on very large datasets.
Equally important is the ability to build monitoring and deployment technol-
ogies for these systems.
In addition to building the infrastructure, data engineering and infrastructure
takes ideas developed by the product and marketing analytics group and im-
plements them so they can operate in production at scale. For example, a rec-
ommendation engine for videos may be prototyped using SQL, Pig, or Hive.
If testing shows that the recommendation engine is of value, it will need to be
deployed so that it supports SLAs specifying appropriate availability and la-
tencies. Migrating the product from prototype into production may require
re-implementing it so it can deliver performance at scale. If SQL and a rela-
tional database prove to be too slow, you may need to move to HBase, queried
by Hive or Pig. Once the application has been deployed, it must be monitored
to ensure that it continues meeting its requirements. It must also be monitored
to ensure that it is producing relevant results. Doing so requires more sophis-
ticated software development.
Organizational and reporting alignment
Should an organization be structured according to the functional areas I’ve
discussed, or via some other mechanism? There is no easy answer. Key things
to consider include the people involved, the size and scale of the organization,
10 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 18 ---
and the organizational dynamics of the company (e.g., whether the company
is product, marketing, or engineering driven).
In the early stages, people must wear multiple hats. For example, in a startup,
you can’t afford separate groups for analytics, security, operations, and infra-
structure: one or two people may have to do everything. But as an organization
grows, people naturally become more specialized. In addition, it’s a good idea
to remove any single points of failure. Some organizations use a “center-of-
excellence model,” where there is a centralized data team. Others use a hub-
and-spoke model, where there is one central team and members are embedded
within sponsoring teams (for example, the sales team may sponsor people in
analytics to support their business needs). Some organizations are fully de-
centralized, and each team hires to fill its own requirements.
As vague as that answer is, here are the three lessons I’ve learned:
1. If the team is small, its members should sit close to each other. There are
many nuances to working with data, and high-speed interaction between
team members resolves painful, trivial issues.
2. Train people to fish — it only increases your organization’s ability to be
data driven. As previously discussed, organizations like Facebook and
Zynga have democratized data effectively. As a result, these companies
have more people conducting more analysis and looking at key metrics.
This kind of access was nearly unheard of as little as five years ago. There
is a down side: the increased demands on the infrastructure and need for
training. The infrastructure challenge is largely a technical problem, and
one of the easiest ways to manage training is to set up “office hours” and
schedule data classes.
3. All of the functional areas must stay in regular contact and communica-
tion. As the field of data science grows, technology and process innova-
tions will also continue to grow. To keep up to date it is essential for all
of these teams to share their experiences. Even if they are not part of the
same reporting structure, there is a common bond of data that ties every-
one together.
What Makes a Data Scientist?
When Jeff Hammerbacher and I talked about our data science teams, we re-
alized that as our organizations grew, we both had to figure out what to call
the people on our teams. “Business analyst” seemed too limiting. “Data ana-
lyst” was a contender, but we felt that title might limit what people could do.
After all, many of the people on our teams had deep engineering expertise.
“Research scientist” was a reasonable job title used by companies like Sun,
What Makes a Data Scientist? | 11

--- PAGE 19 ---
HP, Xerox, Yahoo, and IBM. However, we felt that most research scientists
worked on projects that were futuristic and abstract, and the work was done
in labs that were isolated from the product development teams. It might take
years for lab research to affect key products, if it ever did. Instead, the focus
of our teams was to work on data applications that would have an immediate
and massive impact on the business. The term that seemed to fit best was data
scientist: those who use both data and science to create something new.
(Note: Although the term “data science” has a long history — usually referring
to business intelligence — “data scientist” appears to be new. Jeff and I have
been asking if anyone else has used this term before we coined it, but we’ve
yet to find anyone who has.)
But how do you find data scientists? Whenever someone asks that question, I
refer them back to a more fundamental question: what makes a good data
scientist? Here is what I look for:
• Technical expertise: the best data scientists typically have deep expertise
in some scientific discipline.
• Curiosity: a desire to go beneath the surface and discover and distill a
problem down into a very clear set of hypotheses that can be tested.
• Storytelling: the ability to use data to tell a story and to be able to com-
municate it effectively.
• Cleverness: the ability to look at a problem in different, creative ways.
People often assume that data scientists need a background in computer sci-
ence. In my experience, that hasn’t been the case: my best data scientists have
come from very different backgrounds. The inventor of LinkedIn’s People You
May Know was an experimental physicist. A computational chemist on my
decision sciences team had solved a 100-year-old problem on energy states of
water. An oceanographer made major impacts on the way we identify fraud.
Perhaps most surprising was the neurosurgeon who turned out to be a wizard
at identifying rich underlying trends in the data.
All the top data scientists share an innate sense of curiosity. Their curiosity is
broad, and extends well beyond their day-to-day activities. They are interested
in understanding many different areas of the company, business, industry, and
technology. As a result, they are often able to bring disparate areas together in
a novel way. For example, I’ve seen data scientists look at sales processes and
realize that by using data in new ways they can make the sales team far more
efficient. I’ve seen data scientists apply novel DNA sequencing techniques to
find patterns of fraud.
What unifies all these people? They all have strong technical backgrounds.
Most have advanced degrees (although I’ve worked with several outstanding
12 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 20 ---
data scientists who haven’t graduated from college). But the real unifying
thread is that all have had to work with a tremendous amount of data before
starting to work on the “real” problem. When I was a first-year graduate stu-
dent, I was interested in weather forecasting. I had an idea about how to un-
derstand the complexity of weather, but needed lots of data. Most of the data
was available online, but due to its size, the data was in special formats and
spread out over many different systems. To make that data useful for my re-
search, I created a system that took over every computer in the department
from 1 AM to 8 AM. During that time, it acquired, cleaned, and processed that
data. Once done, my final dataset could easily fit in a single computer’s RAM.
And that’s the whole point. The heavy lifting was required before I could start
my research. Good data scientists understand, in a deep way, that the heavy
lifting of cleanup and preparation isn’t something that gets in the way of solv-
ing the problem: it is the problem.
These are some examples of training that hone the skills a data scientist needs
to be successful:
• Finding rich data sources.
• Working with large volumes of data despite hardware, software, and
bandwidth constraints.
• Cleaning the data and making sure that data is consistent.
• Melding multiple datasets together.
• Visualizing that data.
• Building rich tooling that enables others to work with data effectively.
One of the challenges of identifying data scientists is that there aren’t many of
them (yet). There are a number of programs that are helping train people, but
the demand outstrips the supply. And experiences like my own suggest that
the best way to become a data scientist isn’t to be trained as a data scientist,
but to do serious, data-intensive work in some other discipline.
Hiring data scientists was such a challenge at every place I’ve worked that I’ve
adopted two models for building and training new hires. First, hire people with
diverse backgrounds who have histories of playing with data to create some-
thing novel. Second, take incredibly bright and creative people right out of
college and put them through a very robust internship program.
Another way to find great data scientists is to run a competition, like Netflix
did. The Netflix Prize was a contest organized to improve their ability to predict
how much a customer would enjoy a movie. If you don’t want to organize your
own competition, you can look at people who have performed well in com-
petitions run by others. Kaggle and Topcoder are great resources when looking
What Makes a Data Scientist? | 13

--- PAGE 21 ---
for this kind of talent. Kaggle has found its own top talent by hiring the best
performers from its own competitions.
Hiring and talent
Many people focus on hiring great data scientists, but they leave out the need
for continued intellectual and career growth. These key aspects of growth are
what I call talent growth. In the three years that I led LinkedIn’s analytics and
data teams, we developed a philosophy around three principles for hiring and
talent growth.
Would we be willing to do a startup with you?
This is the first question we ask ourselves as a team when we meet to evaluate
a candidate. It sums up a number of key criteria:
• Time: If we’re willing to do a startup with you, we’re agreeing that we’d
be willing to be locked in a small room with you for long periods of time.
The ability to enjoy another person’s company is critical to being able to
invest in each other’s growth.
• Trust: Can we trust you? Will we have to look over your shoulder to make
sure you’re doing an A+ job? That may go without saying, but the reverse
is also important: will you trust me? If you don’t trust me, we’re both in
trouble.
• Communication: Can we communicate with each other quickly and effi-
ciently? If we’re going to spend a tremendous amount of time together and
if we need to trust each other, we’ll need to communicate. Over time, we
should be able to anticipate each other’s needs in a way that allows us to
be highly efficient.
Can you “knock the socks off” of the company in 90 days?
Once the first criteria has been met, it’s critical to establish mechanisms to
ensure that the candidate will succeed. We do this by setting expectations for
the quality of the candidate’s work, and by setting expectations for the velocity
of his or her progress.
First, the “knock the socks off” part: by setting the goal high, we’re asking
whether you have the mettle to be part of an elite team. More importantly, it
is a way of establishing a handshake for ensuring success. That’s where the 90
days comes in. A new hire won’t come up with something mind blowing if the
team doesn’t bring the new hire up to speed quickly. The team needs to orient
new hires around existing systems and processes. Similarly, the new hire needs
to make the effort to progress, quickly. Does this person ask questions when
14 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 22 ---
they get stuck? There are no dumb questions, and toughing it out because
you’re too proud or insecure to ask is counterproductive. Can the new hire
bring a new system up in a day, or does it take a week or more? It’s important
to understand that doing something mind-blowing in 90 days is a team goal,
as much as an individual goal. It is essential to pair the new hire with a suc-
cessful member of the team. Success is shared.
This criterion sets new hires up for long-term success. Once they’ve passed the
first milestone, they’ve done something that others in the company can rec-
ognize, and they have the confidence that will lead to future achievements. I’ve
seen everyone from interns all the way to seasoned executives meet this crite-
rion. And many of my top people have had multiple successes in their first 90
days.
In four to six years, will you be doing something amazing?
What does it mean to do something amazing? You might be running the team
or the company. You might be doing something in a completely different dis-
cipline. You may have started a new company that’s changing the industry.
It’s difficult to talk concretely because we’re talking about potential and long-
term futures. But we all want success to breed success, and I believe we can
recognize the people who will help us to become mutually successful.
I don’t necessarily expect a new hire to do something amazing while he or she
works for me. The four- to six-year horizon allows members of the team to
build long-term road maps. Many organizations make the time commitment
amorphous by talking about vague, never-ending career ladders. But profes-
sionals no longer commit themselves to a single company for the bulk of their
careers. With each new generation of professionals, the number of organiza-
tions and even careers has increased. So rather than fight it, embrace the fact
that people will leave, so long as they leave to do something amazing. What
I’m interested in is the potential: if you have that potential, we all win and we
all grow together, whether your biggest successes come with my team or
somewhere else.
Finally, this criteria is mutual. A new hire won’t do something amazing, now
or in the future, if the organization he or she works for doesn’t hold up its end
of the bargain. The organization must provide a platform and opportunities
for the individual to be successful. Throwing a new hire into the deep end and
expecting success doesn’t cut it. Similarly, the individual must make the com-
pany successful to elevate the platform that he or she will launch from.
What Makes a Data Scientist? | 15

--- PAGE 23 ---
Building the LinkedIn Data Science Team
I’m proud of what we’ve accomplished in building the LinkedIn data team.
However, when we started, it didn’t look anything like the organization that
is there today. We started with 1.5 engineers (who would later go on to invent
Voldemort, Kafka, and the real-time recommendation engine systems), no
data services team (there wasn’t even a data warehouse), and five analysts (who
would later become the core of LinkedIn’s data science group) who supported
everyone from the CFO to the product managers.
When we started to build the team, the first thing I did was go to many different
technical organizations (the likes of Yahoo, eBay, Google, Facebook, Sun, etc.)
to get their thoughts and opinions. What I found really surprised me. The
companies all had fantastic sets of employees who could be considered “data
scientists.” However, they were uniformly discouraged. They did first-rate
work that they considered critical, but that had very little impact on the or-
ganization. They’d finish some analysis or come up with some ideas, and the
product managers would say “that’s nice, but it’s not on our roadmap.” As a
result, the data scientists developing these ideas were frustrated, and their or-
ganizations had trouble capitalizing on what they were capable of doing.
Our solution was to make the data group a full product team responsible for
designing, implementing, and maintaining products. As a product team, data
scientists could experiment, build, and add value directly to the company. This
resulted not only in further development of LinkedIn products like PYMK and
Who’s Viewed My Profile, but also in features like Skills, which tracks various
skills and assembles a picture of what’s needed to succeed in any given area,
and Career Explorer, which helps you explore different career trajectories.
It’s important that our data team wasn’t comprised solely of mathematicians
and other “data people.” It’s a fully integrated product group that includes
people working in design, web development, engineering, product marketing,
and operations. They all understand and work with data, and I consider them
all data scientists. We intentionally kept the distinction between different roles
in the group blurry. Often, an engineer can have the insight that makes it clear
how the product’s design should work, or vice-versa — a designer can have
the insight that helps the engineers understand how to better use the data. Or
it may take someone from marketing to understand what a customer really
wants to accomplish.
The silos that have traditionally separated data people from engineering, from
design, and from marketing, don’t work when you’re building data products.
I would contend that it is questionable whether those silos work for any kind
of product development. But with data, it never works to have a waterfall
process in which one group defines the product, another builds visual mock-
16 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 24 ---
ups, a data scientist preps the data, and finally a set of engineers builds it to
some specification document. We’re not building Microsoft Office, or some
other product where there’s 20-plus years of shared wisdom about how inter-
faces should work. Every data project is a new experiment, and design is a
critical part of that experiment. It’s similar for operations: data products
present entirely different stresses on a network and storage infrastructure than
traditional sites. They capture much more data: petabytes and even exabytes.
They deliver results that mash up data from many sources, some internal, some
not. You’re unlikely to create a data product that is reliable and that performs
reasonably well if the product team doesn’t incorporate operations from the
start. This isn’t a simple matter of pushing the prototype from your laptop to
a server farm.
Finally, quality assurance (QA) of data products requires a radically different
approach. Building test datasets is nontrivial, and it is often impossible to test
all of the use cases. As different data streams come together into a final product,
all sorts of relevance and precision issues become apparent. To develop this
kind of product effectively, the ability to adapt and iterate quickly throughout
the product life cycle is essential. To ensure agility, we build small groups to
work on specific products, projects, or analyses. When we can, I like to seat
anyone with a dependency with another person in the same area.
A data science team isn’t just people: it’s tooling, processes, the interaction
between the team and the rest of the company, and more. At LinkedIn, we
couldn’t have succeeded if it weren’t for the tools we used. When you’re
working with petabytes of data, you need serious power tools to do the heavy
lifting. Some, such as Kafka and Voldemort (now open source projects) were
homegrown, not because we thought we should have our own technology, but
because we didn’t have a choice. Our products couldn’t scale without them.
In addition to these technologies, we use other open source technologies such
as Hadoop and many vendor-supported solutions as well. Many of these are
for data warehousing, and traditional business intelligence.
Tools are important because they allow you to automate. Automation frees up
time, and makes it possible to do the creative work that leads to great products.
Something as simple as reducing the turnaround time on a complex query from
“get the result in the morning” to “get the result after a cup of coffee” represents
a huge increase in productivity. If queries run overnight, you can only afford
to ask questions when you already think you know the answer. If queries run
in minutes, you can experiment and be creative.
Interaction between the data science teams and the rest of corporate culture
is another key factor. It’s easy for a data team (any team, really) to be bom-
barded by questions and requests. But not all requests are equally important.
How do you make sure there’s time to think about the big questions and the
Building the LinkedIn Data Science Team | 17

--- PAGE 25 ---
big problems? How do you balance incoming requests (most of which are
tagged “as soon as possible”) with long-term goals and projects? It’s important
to have a culture of prioritization: everyone in the group needs to be able to
ask about the priority of incoming requests. Everything can’t be urgent.
The result of building a data team is, paradoxically, that you see data products
being built in all parts of the company. When the company sees what can be
created with data, when it sees the power of being data enabled, you’ll see data
products appearing everywhere. That’s how you know when you’ve won.
Reinvention
Companies are always looking to reinvent themselves. There’s never been a
better time: from economic pressures that demand greater efficiency, to new
kinds of products that weren’t conceivable a few years ago, the opportunities
presented by data are tremendous.
But it’s a mistake to treat data science teams like any old product group. (It is
probably a mistake to treat any old product group like any old product group,
but that’s another issue.) To build teams that create great data products, you
have to find people with the skills and the curiosity to ask the big questions.
You have build cross-disciplinary groups with people who are comfortable
creating together, who trust each other, and who are willing to help each other
be amazing. It’s not easy, but if it were easy, it wouldn’t be as much fun.
About the Author
Dr. DJ Patil is a Data Science in Residence at Greylock Partners. He has held a
variety of roles in academia, industry, and government. These include the Chief
Scientist, Chief Security Officer and Head of Analytics and Data Teams at the
LinkedIn Corporation. Additionally he has held a number of roles at Skype,
PayPal, and eBay. As a member of the faculty at the University of Maryland, his
research focused on nonlinear dynamics and chaos theory applied to numerical
weather prediction. As an AAAS Science & Technology Policy Fellow for the
Department of Defense, Dr. Patil directed new efforts to leverage social network
analysis and the melding of computational and social sciences to anticipate
emerging threats to the US. He has also co-chaired a major review of US efforts
to prevent bioweapons proliferation in Central Asia and co-founded the Iraqi
Virtual Science Library (IVSL). More details can be found on his LinkedIn pro-
file and he can be followed on Twitter (@dpatil).
18 | Building Data Science Teams

--- PAGE 26 ---
Be at the forefront of 
the data revolution.
Strata offers the nuts-and-bolts of building a data-driven business.
n	 See the latest tools and technologies you need to make data work
n	 Find new ways to leverage data across industries and disciplines
n	 Take big data from science project to real business application
n	 Understand the career opportunities for data professionals
Strata Conference is for developers, data scientists, data analysts, and 
other data professionals.
Registration is now open at strataconf.com/strata2012
20% Exclusive Discount for Strata Alumni 
Use code STR12ALM
February 28 – March 1, 2012 
Santa Clara, CA

