--- PAGE 1 ---
THE DATA ANALYTICS
HANDBOOK
CEO’S + MANAGERS

--- PAGE 2 ---
1
ABOUT 
THE AUTHORS
BRIAN LIOU Content
Brian graduated from Cal with simultaneous degrees 
in Business Administration at the Haas School of 
Business and Statistics with an emphasis in Computer 
Science. He 
previously 
worked 
in 
investment 
banking before he transitioned into Data Analytics 
at MightyHive, an advertising technology company 
backed by Andreessen Horowitz.
TRISTAN TAO Content
Tristan holds dual degrees in Computer Science and 
Statistics from UC Berkeley (‘14). He first began 
working as a quantitative technical data analyst at 
Starmine (Thomson Reuters). From there he worked 
as a software engineer at Splunk. He has experience 
working with various Machine Learning models, NLP, 
Hadoop/Hive, Storm, R, Python and Java.
ELIZABETH LIN Design
Elizabeth is in her third year studying Computer 
Science at Cal with a focus in design. She is President of 
Innovative Design, a student group of visual designers 
and photographers, and Layout Director for BARE 
Magazine, Cal’s fashion and arts publication. She has 
interned at LinkedIn, TechValidate, and UC Berkeley’s 
EECS Department. She will be a Product Design Intern 
at Khan Academy this summer.


--- PAGE 3 ---
W
hat exactly do the sexy “Data Scientists” do? We start 
with this simple question. What other professions are 
there in Big Data? What tools do they use to accomplish their 
tasks? How can I enter the industry if I don’t have a Ph.D. in 
Statistics? The genesis of “The Data Analytics Handbook” 
stems from our own internal frustrations with these questions; 
as recent graduates of UC Berkeley (Go Bears!) in statistics, 
we saw a burgeoning industry craving curious minds but 
disconnected from its potential employees because of a lack 
of understanding of what the Data Analytics industry is and of 
what it requires. And so, we set out to discover the answers for 
ourselves by reaching out to industry leaders, academics, and 
professionals.
This handbook is the first of three parts and will focus on the 
experiences of current data analysts and data scientists. What 
we discovered in our research is that while each interviewee’s 
response was highly informative, their knowledge was 
fundamentally incomplete; the truth is that the Big Data 
industry is still so nascent that there is no singular definition 
of a data scientist or data analyst. In fact, the two terms are 
often used interchangeably.
While we continue to ponder the big questions surrounding 
Big Data, we believe that our research has shone light in an area 
unexplored, making our interviews that much more valuable 
to you. The firsthand experiences of those in the trenches, 
those leading the troops, and those crazy Ph.Ds, have not been 
shared until now.  We hope you enjoy reading the interviews as 
much as we enjoyed conducting them!
2
From Tristan, Brian, & Elizabeth

--- PAGE 4 ---
TOP 5 TAKEAWAYS
FROM CEOS AND MANAGERS
1. The Information Revolution is real.
Data analytics will be applied everywhere but it will not surface itself to the 
end user like most good technologies. Data oriented decisions is a reality for all 
decision making in the future.
2. Data analytics is becoming increasingly accessible.
Technology is lowering the barriers to becoming both a data scientist and a 
data analyst. Tools being developed at BigML, Y-hat, Cloudera, and many more 
empower data analysts to work as data scientists and business analysts to work 
as data analysts.
3. Do your own projects to break into the industry.
The truth is, even in a quantitative major you are not taught what you need to 
know to work in data analytics. There is a learning gap between academia and 
industry that is best filled by doing projects. Find some sports statistics and do 
your own analysis. Learn R so that you can complete this analysis, not just to 
learn R itself. Also try Kaggle.
4. Statistics > Programming.
The development of tools and popularity of programmers has caused black 
box statistical analysis usage. Understanding selection bias vs. sampling bias 
and the underlying assumptions to which statistical functions are built on will 
make your opinions matter and your work invaluable.
5. The most important skill is being able to ask the right questions.
The power of data analytics is in taking open response questions and framing 
them to be multiple choice. Therefore if you have the ability to filter a million 
questions into options A through D, you are a data scientist for hire.
3

--- PAGE 5 ---
4
05
10
14
18
22
26
30
34
38
DEREK STEER
DEAN ABBOT T
TOM WHEELER
MIKE OLSON
ROHAN DEUSKAR
MARY ELLEN GORDEN
GREG LAMP
ALI SYED
DAVE GERSTER
MODE ANALYTICS
SMARTER REMARKETER, INC.
CLOUDERA
CLOUDERA
STYLITICS
FLURRY
YHAT
PERSONTYLE
BIGML
TABLE OF CONTENTS

--- PAGE 6 ---
05
DEREK STEER
CEO + CO-FOUNDER AT MODE ANALYTICS
DEREK is the CEO and co-founder of Mode. Previously, he worked on the 
Analytics teams at Yammer and Facebook, both with a focus on monetization.
MODE ANALYTICS is building tools that eliminate the costs of sharing and 
discovery to make analysts and data scientists more productive.

--- PAGE 7 ---
06
Can we go into your background first? You have a unique 
perspective in that you have both the experience of a data 
analyst at Yammer and the experience as CEO of Mode 
Analytics.
I graduated from Occidental College where I majored in economics. My brain 
is just wired for economics – I think of everything in terms of opportunity cost 
and tradeoffs. I wanted to take a job where I could apply economic thinking, 
so I ended up working for an economic consulting firm doing analysis to 
support expert testimony in antitrust cases and mergers. I worked there for 
a few years, then made my way to Facebook. In consulting, managers tell you 
the beginning and the end of the problem you’re solving, and it’s up to you 
to figure out the middle part. At Facebook, I spent a lot more time thinking 
about the beginning (how to frame a problem) and the end (what the output/
recommendation should look like). I wanted to be somewhere smaller, though, 
so I joined Yammer as one of the early members of its Analytics team.
At Yammer, I worked almost exclusively on sales, marketing, and customer-
success related projects – a natural fit after working on monetization at 
Facebook. Yammer was similar in that they sought to “democratize data.” A 
part of my job was to enable my internal customers to make better decisions 
using data without necessarily having to ask me for recommendations every 
time. I did this by creating lightweight tools – either web apps or reusable SQL 
queries – that my customers could run on their own. When a particular request 
required ad-hoc analysis, I spent most of my time on the beginning and ends 
of the problem, and almost no time executing. That is to say, I thought of clever 
ways to solve problems by counting and summing things rather than building 
complex models. Model building takes a lot more time and doesn’t necessarily 
lead to better business decisions. My former boss, Peter Fishman, deserves a 
lot of credit for enforcing this type of behavior on the team, a behavior that, I 
believe, was critical in making the Analytics team at Yammer successful.
I left Yammer after two and a half years or so along with a couple of teammates 
there to start Mode.
What are the most important skills you think a data analyst 
needs?
Creative thinking and the ability to solve problems. I hate that answer though 
because it’s so vague. It’s true, but it’s vague. I will try to give a concrete answer. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
I think it makes sense to explain this in the context of an interview question, 
because I’m specifically trying to measure problem solving ability.
The way I assess creative problem solving in an interview is to ask about a 
specific project the analysts completed at a previous job and request that he 
walk me through the tradeoffs he faced and how he determined the correct 
path. When I do this, I’m simply listening for sound logic. If anything sounds 
odd, I’ll probe deeper. If I’m not an expert in the type of business problem the 
candidate is solving, he should be able to easily answer all my questions about 
how to perform the best analysis.
I also use some hypothetical questions. I like to ask people about pricing 
because it’s very nuanced. “What should we charge for Yammer?” It requires 
some fundamental knowledge of Yammer’s business model, so it’s also a quick 
check to see if you’ve done your research about how Yammer works. Assuming 
you have, it’s still a multi-faceted problem. Good candidates are occasionally 
able to talk through the complex work they might do to find the right price, 
but what I really love is when people break down problems into the simplest 
elements. The most important thing about setting price is understanding 
what you are trying to optimize: You’re optimizing revenue, which is price 
times quantity. It’s a simple equation but even just saying that gives you an 
understanding of the levers you have to pull and what they’re going to affect. 
If you can nail that part, many other parts of the problem become clearer.
What are aspects of the job as a data analyst that you enjoyed 
and what are aspects that you didn’t enjoy?
What I have enjoyed the most is working with great people. I would do any 
job as long as I liked the people I was working with. 
Within the world of data analysis, I might be a little weird in that I don’t 
particularly enjoy learning new technical skills. It’s something I do because 
I have to, but what I really enjoy is the feeling of solving a new problem that 
leads to some sort of action. If other people are applying my work and seeing 
returns from it, that makes me happy.
How pervasive do you see the demand for data analytics 
becoming? Do you see the demand going past the 
metropolitan hubs of SF/NY?
I have a friend who lives in Arizona and works for CVS where they have 
hundreds of people who do data analysis. It’s already there. I’ll give you 
07

--- PAGE 9 ---
another example. SAS has 70,000 customer sites in the US. It’s not just a NY/
SF thing. The question is whether people are doing it well. My suspicion is 
that the data analysis that people are doing across the US is actually relatively 
similar in nature. Even the data looks very similar from company to company 
within a given vertical. There’s a huge opportunity to bring together all of these 
companies, as well as individuals who are doing analysis in a non-professional 
setting. That’s part of what we’re trying to do at Mode.
What are some of the softer skills required for a data analyst?
To some degree, analysis or data science is all about trust. You can deliver 
the best insights but if your customers don’t trust you, it’s useless. Analysis 
that does not turn into a decision is basically a waste of time. Establishing that 
trust is a tricky thing to do and requires a fair degree of interpersonal skill. It’s 
partially about your customers believing that you’re smart and capable enough 
to actually deliver accurate insights. Once you’ve got that down, it’s about 
communicating ideas clearly. I love linear regression. It’s fantastic because it’s 
very easy to explain to a non-technical person what a coefficient means. You 
can identify which variables make a difference, and whether they are positively 
or negatively correlated with the outcome you want to affect. You don’t even 
need to show your customer the regression output – you can just explain it in 
plain English. More complex models make this a bit tougher. And, of course, 
counting and summation are the easiest things to explain.
How granular do you see the applications of data analytics 
getting?
I think its going to be applied everywhere but I don’t think its going to surface 
itself to most people as data analysis. The best applications of data science in 
products are things like Jawbone’s UP, which is processing a ton of data behind 
the scenes to say “here’s what you should do at this moment to be healthier.” 
The recommendations are very powerful and you know they are based on data, 
but it’s not something you think about as you interact with the product. Maybe 
even better is a sort of system where data gets you 90% of the way and you 
make the ultimate decision. The power of data science is how one can turn 
open-ended problems into multiple-choice questions. That’s what data does 
really well.
What advice would you give a non-technical person trying to 
gain more technical skill?
08

--- PAGE 10 ---
It’s pretty easy to learn new technical skills. Or, at least, it can be. I don’t 
really believe in learning or applying skills simply for the sake of doing hard 
stuff. I actually think it’s dangerous, because that’s the type of thinking that 
can lead you down rabbit holes when you’re doing something important that’s 
time-sensitive. I think that the best way to learn skills so that you can apply 
them practically in the future is to start with a project, then learn all the 
skills necessary to complete it as you go. If you can’t think of a project that 
incorporates the skill you’re trying to learn, you should probably ask yourself 
why you’re even bothering to learn it in the first place.
09

--- PAGE 11 ---
10
DEAN ABBOT T
CO-FOUNDER AT SMARTER REMARKETER, INC.
DEAN holds a B.S. in computational mathematics from Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute and an M.A.M. in Applied Mathematics from University of Virginia. 
In his early career, he worked as a research scientist at companies including 
Lockheed Martin and Elder Research, Inc. He also founded Abbott Analytics. 
He is now the co-founder and chief data scientist at Smarter Remarketer, Inc. 
He also recently published a book: “Applied Predictive Analytics: Principles 
and Techniques for the Professional Data Analyst” [Wiley].
SMARTER REMARKETER collects comprehensive behavioral data. This 
includes traditional “web analytics” style data, but also a compliment of 
specialized data required for behavioral marketing best practices. Through 
Smarter Remarketer’s Metrics feature, the company shows retailers exactly 
how people are behaving, why they are abandoning and how much revenue 
can be recaptured.

--- PAGE 12 ---
11
How would you define the role of a data analyst vs. a data 
scientist?
Data Science is a relatively new way to describe analytics. Data analysts are 
more business focused, likely to be less academic focused, have a bachelors 
degree, and are trying the solve business questions. Data Scientists are more 
dominated by advanced degrees holders, more likely to work with big data 
tools (such as NoSQL, Hadoop, MongoDB, and Cassandra), utilize R/Python, 
and also more likely to be serious programmers. The data science position may 
be a superset of most analyst roles, whereas data analysis may be a subset of 
data science.
Would you say that data scientists and data analysts work in 
disparate groups? 
I think so. The data scientists I work with are more research oriented. They 
are more cutting-edge and are working to create new ideas and new algorithms. 
They also try to solve problems where the traditional databases don’t work 
well. Data analysts are more likely to work within a business group. In certain 
situations where there is a specific data science group, people are more likely 
to be labeling themselves data scientists.
Do you see the data analyst job becoming more standardized?
Data analysts / business analysts (other times known as predictive modelers 
or data miners), are more likely to work within business oriented groups. A lot 
of these people are not coming out of college wanting to become data analysts; 
generally they have a business related degree. But as they work, they realize 
that they like math and data. Over time these people cluster towards data 
analytical jobs. Just recently, one of my clients hired people from the outside 
to train in-house employees to become the “data analyst”.
How deep of statistical understanding / programming skills do 
you need to become a data analyst?
More math is always better, especially if you’re doing cutting edge work. 
Nonetheless algorithms such as Decision Trees, Neural Networks, and Support 
Vector Machines will work right out the box even if you don’t know how they 
work mathematically. I have a book coming out called “Applied Predictive 
Analytics”, which teaches people predictive analytics while using minimal 

--- PAGE 13 ---
12
mathematics (some algebra and basic stats terminology). It is important to 
know when/how to turn the nobs in statistical models. Ultimately, math isn’t 
the most important metric for an analyst’s quality. But rather love for data 
and an innate curiosity make for a great analyst; I call it the “freakonomics 
mindset”. Also, knowing the details/strength/weakness of the algorithm is 
always helpful. This is especially important when the model doesn’t work: why 
is the decision tree not working? Can the data be skewed? You learn to ask the 
right questions.
How do you develop the skills required to be an effective data 
analyst? Your previous work involved your client bringing in an 
outside expert (you!), but how can an undergrad/recent-grad 
develop the same skills?
Two ways. First, take a few classes to get some fundamental understanding 
of data. Not necessarily databases, but rather about data and what data means. 
Basic stats and basic courses in machine learning can help (know thy data!) 
In university classes you learn theoretical details and implementations 
etc. But the details are not required and are no longer used once you’re out 
working in the industry; university educations don’t prepare you for business 
applications. Some schools with application-based courses (UCSD, UCI) have 
after-hours programs for business people, which are helpful. Second, start 
building models. Work on projects. It helps to work with someone who has 
done it before. Data preparation is harder to teach because there are so many 
ways for you to do it incorrectly. It is hard to teach in a way where you cover all 
“incorrect” approaches. It is a bootstrapping method; try co-op, internships, 
working in a company etc.
How do I make a switch into data analytics after I’ve been 
working in the industry?
Take online courses. Read some books (“Data Mining Techniques” – Linoff, 
or my “Applied Predictive Analytics” book). There are books that will teach 
you applications, good principles, and how to approach the problems. Once 
you understand the process better, get on Kaggle! “Handbook of Statistical 
Analysis and Data Mining applications” – Elder, Miner is also a good read.
Which is more important for a data analyst: intellectual 
curiosity/intuition V.S. deep statistical knowledge?

--- PAGE 14 ---
13
The curiosity. The understanding of statistics can be gained, but the curiosity 
is more innate; if you’re not naturally into working with data, you can be a 
fantastic analyst, but you become a specific type of analyst. These analysts 
may not care enough to build a better model. They lack creativity and the 
determination to go the extra mile. They’ll need handholding and will struggle 
to resolve new problems. 
With curiosity about the data and an interest in why the data looks the way 
it looks, you can overcome a lack of mathematics training. I once worked with 
an analyst who had only high school math but became a great modeler. In the 
beginning, he didn’t even know algebra well and certainly didn’t know any 
calculus or linear algebra. But he had good intuition and determination, and 
ultimately became an excellent analyst and modeler.

--- PAGE 15 ---
14
TOM WHEELER
SENIOR CURRICULUM DEVELOPER AT CLOUDERA
TOM spent most of his career as a software engineer working on the design 
and implementation of software for major financial, healthcare, and aerospace 
firms. He started using Apache Hadoop in 2008 after he recognized that it 
solved a common problem he’d observed at several companies; namely, how to 
store and process ever-increasing amounts of diverse data at reasonable cost. 
In 2011, he joined the curriculum development team at Cloudera so that he 
could share what he’d learned with others.
CLOUDERA is revolutionizing enterprise data management by offering the 
first unified Platform for Big Data: The Enterprise Data Hub. Cloudera offers 
enterprises one place to store, process and analyze all their data, empowering 
them to extend the value of existing investments while enabling fundamental 
new ways to derive value from their data.

--- PAGE 16 ---
15
What are the most valuable skills an aspiring data analyst 
should develop?  
The most important skills are understanding which factors help a business 
succeed and determining the key metrics by which those can be evaluated. These 
skills ultimately provide the foundation needed for constant experimentation 
and iterative improvements that will help uncover important patterns and 
help a business thrive.
Our understanding is that Data Analysts require a certain level 
of technical skill and experience; do you not feel that is the 
case?
While Data Analysts do require some amount of technical skill, it’s different 
than what a programmer might need. Instead of developing an e-commerce 
application in Java as a programmer would, the data analyst might write 
queries in a language like SQL to analyze the profit margins or sales trends for 
that Web site. Even though these skillsets are a bit different from one another, 
both require specialized training.
Let me also contrast this with the role of a Data Scientist. Given a set of 
information like the order data for an e-commerce site, the Data Analyst 
knows how to answer important questions like, “how many products did we 
sell this year compared to last year” or “which product categories have the 
highest profit margin?” The Data Scientist, on the other hand, knows how to 
gather new data as well as query it. They approach the problem scientifically, 
designing experiments, forming hypotheses, and building systems to collect 
the data needed to validate the results. In other words, the Data Scientist knows 
how to ask questions as well as answer them, and has the software engineering 
skills needed to build new tools when needed. That’s a rare combination of 
skills, but one that’s increasingly in demand as businesses become more data-
driven.
Can you expand on what you mean by a Data Analyst being 
able to ask the right questions?
Data analysts need to understand the constraints of a business and what makes 
it successful. For example, if you’re working for an airline, then you’d want to 
know which things affect costs, which things affect revenue, and which things 
help you to attract and retain customers. Fuel is a major cost for an airline, 

--- PAGE 17 ---
so you might do some analysis to project the future cost and buy in quantity 
when the price is low. In terms of increasing revenue, consider that customers 
are typically more sensitive to price when buying tickets for personal travel 
than for business, since the fare comes out of their own pockets. You might 
therefore attract new customers by offering low-cost fares to popular vacation 
destinations like Florida or Hawaii and offering higher-cost fares with perks 
that appeal to business travelers going to destinations like New York City.
Do you think there is a less experienced version of a data 
scientist that an undergraduate degreed person could 
achieve?
Certainly. Not all data scientists have a Ph.D. They tend to have a mix of skills 
in statistics, software development, research, business, and so on. That’s a 
really rare combination and there are currently very few PhD programs that 
give you exposure to all of them.  
Just like there are lots of amazing programmers who don’t have a PhD in 
computer science, so too are there amazing data scientists who started working 
after getting a Masters or Bachelors degree in one of those areas. If they have 
an inquisitive personality and a lot of self-motivation, they tend to can quickly 
gain any other skills they need through real-world experience.
How would a young professional best prepare himself to be a 
data analyst?
Aside from general business experience, it’s important to learn how to use a 
variety of tools. People who only know one tool really well tend to see it as the 
solution to every problem, but people with a broader range of experience are 
versatile and adapt quickly.
Although data analysts often use graphical business intelligence tools such 
as Tableau or Microstrategy, it’s worth the time to also learn how to write your 
own queries directly in SQL. This lets you go beyond what a specific tool might 
support and allows you to directly query any modern database or even a “Big 
Data” system like Cloudera Impala.
Learning how to work with Big Data is increasingly important, and fortunately, 
many universities are starting to offer courses on it. Cloudera has an academic 
partnership program with dozens of leading universities that provides 
professors with material from Cloudera’s professional training courses. As 
part of this program, students also receive a discount on certification exams, 
16

--- PAGE 18 ---
and getting certified is a good way for people to demonstrate their expertise 
and stand out in a competitive job market.
Finally, self-education is a great option for learning new skills. Udacity 
recently partnered with Cloudera to offer an “Intro to Hadoop and MapReduce” 
course, for example, and they’ve got some others that are really relevant to 
people just getting started in analytics, such as Intro to Statistics, Intro to Data 
Science, and a range of machine learning courses.
What do you think of R as a skill for data analysts?
R is definitely a valuable skill to have. Although R was designed specifically 
for statistical analysis, it still is a programming language. Every Data Scientist 
definitely ought to know R, but not every Data Analyst will use it. I’d say that 
SQL is the more valuable skill for Data Analysts in general, but once they’re 
comfortable with SQL, it’s worth the time to learn R too.
How clearly do you see the role of the data analyst as being 
defined in today’s job market? Do you see it becoming a more 
standardized position?
Data Analyst is one of those job titles that mean slightly different things for 
each industry or organization. It’s kind of a general term like programmer; 
for example, some programmers design new programs while others do 
maintenance on existing ones. Some are doing low-level things like writing 
device drivers and others are doing high-level things like developing Web 
applications.
Although I don’t really see the “Data Analyst” role becoming well-defined 
across all industries, I do see demand for that role increasing across all 
industries. To paraphrase something that Google’s Chief Economist Hal Varian 
said in an interview for the Freakonomics blog in 2008, the key to success is 
being able to offer value around some commodity that’s becoming ubiquitous 
and cheap. Organizations are producing exponentially more data than they did 
even ten years ago and this trend will continue far into the future. The people 
who have the skills needed to extract value from all of this data are going to be 
in very high demand.
17

--- PAGE 19 ---
18
MIKE OLSON
CO-FOUNDER AT CLOUDERA
MIKE was the founder of Cloudera and is currently the Board Chairman and 
Chief Strategy Officer. He graduated from UC Berkeley with a Bachelors of Arts 
in Computer Science and a Masters of Science in Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science.
CLOUDERA is revolutionizing enterprise data management by offering the 
first unified Platform for Big Data: The Enterprise Data Hub. Cloudera offers 
enterprises one place to store, process and analyze all their data, empowering 
them to extend the value of existing investments while enabling fundamental 
new ways to derive value from their data.

--- PAGE 20 ---
19
How would you describe the value that data analysts bring to a 
company? How about data scientists?
Data is newly available in volumes and in variety previously impossible to 
capture. That explosion in growth is a big opportunity – companies that figure 
out how to process and analyze it will rack up real competitive advantages over 
those that don’t. Every organization needs to become data driven.
Fortunately the tools available have evolved quickly right alongside the data. 
It’s now easy and inexpensive to store, process and analyze that data. The skills 
required to do so are still reasonably thin on the ground, and the profession of 
“data scientist” has emerged to fill that gap. It’s a rich area for innovative 
smart young folks to get into.
In the long term, the data science expertise that’s between the ears of people 
needs to be rendered into software, so that we can scale out. It’s hard to make 
huge numbers of really smart new workers; it’s easier to capture smarts in 
applications and tools and make them available to traditional businesspeople 
who can use them to explore their markets, evaluate their competitors and 
engage with their customers better.
So I believe the best data scientists will also be competent software developers.
Cloudera sells its big data infrastructure to banks, hospitals, 
etc. but who takes care of the analysis? How much analytic 
consulting does Cloudera have to provide?
About two thirds of our revenue today comes from software subscriptions, 
and we see that fraction growing over time. Our annual renewals model means 
that most of our installed base renews every year, and the work we do to find 
new customers pays us off for years to come.
Of the remaining third, the money is split about equally between training and 
consulting. We view both of those as ways to drive our subscription numbers up 
– we make customers smarter with training, and we help them build analytics 
with consulting, and they’ll consume more of our software.
We have a rich ecosystem of systems integration and consulting partners 
including big names like TCS, Accenture and Cap Gemini, and smaller firms 
like Think Big and Mu Sigma. They do a lot of work with our customers. One 
financial analyst estimates that for every dollar spent on software licenses in 
big data, fourteen dollars are spent on hardware and integration services.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Overall Cloudera seems to answer the question of big data 
capture and storage. What do you see as the answer for the 
question of analysis? Put another way there is a clear talent 
shortage in data analytic skill, how do see this gap being filled?
There is a lot of innovation in that space right now. Tons of startups are 
attacking different vertical-specific analytic opportunities. Others are building 
horizontal capabilities – machine learning, for example, is useful across most 
of our installed base.
As I said before, those techniques need to get rendered into software and 
made consumable by traditional enterprises. Business people are plenty smart 
enough to use the tools and interpret the results, they just need help from 
data scientists who build the apps that do machine learning by way of random 
forests and present the results in useful ways.
When relational databases were brand new, no one knew SQL, there were no 
apps and business people couldn’t use them very easily. That changed with the 
huge economic opportunity that the database market created for app and tool 
developers. Same thing is happening today in big data. The landscape is way, 
way better than it was when we started six years ago!
Currently it seems like big data technology is really only 
necessary or possible with the largest technology companies 
or corporations but do you see big data applications (using 
Hadoop/MapReduce) for small businesses eventually? If so, 
how?
I think it’s already there. Most of the public cloud adoption of Apache Hadoop 
is by small and medium-sized enterprises.
I also think that people will consume machine learning as a service, bundled 
into business apps they require. Think about how you use Amazon and Google. 
There’s tons of analytics and personalization behind the scenes there. You’re 
getting Hadooped all the time. You may not run that software yourself but 
you are using it extensively by way of the online services you consume. More 
cloud apps will mean more big data analytics, made available in useful ways to 
regular people and small companies.
What are the limitations of Big Data? What are the pessimists 
of the information revolution arguing?
20

--- PAGE 22 ---
Clearly privacy is a big deal, and we have work to do there. Technology 
determines what can be collected; we must formulate a policy and ethics that 
tell us what is okay to do with it, and we need a governance framework that can 
impose meaningful penalties on misuse. Plenty of opportunity but the need 
here is pretty urgent.
The problem is worse because of inconsistent laws among countries. The EU 
has a pretty comprehensive data policy, with each country having adopted a 
consistent framework at the national level. The US has essentially no Federal-
level data policy. We spell out policy in some key verticals – HIPAA, FCRA – 
but leave it to states, and worse to companies, to craft and enforce policies 
generally.
That patchwork makes it very hard to do business. The internet doesn’t 
really know about geopolitical borders. When EU data privacy and safe harbor 
provisions impose rules on data that crosses borders, it creates enormous 
friction for businesses and NGOs. Friction equals cost.
What advice do you have for undergraduates or young 
professionals aspiring to enter the industry?
My advice to young people pursuing any course of study is the same: Find 
problems that really interest you, really blow your hair back, and find a way to 
work on them. Chase interesting. Don’t chase money. Money will come if you 
love what you do so much that you become a world-class expert and plow huge 
effort and time into your work.
21

--- PAGE 23 ---
22
ROHAN DEUSKAR
CEO + CO-FOUNDER AT STYLITICS
ROHAN is the CEO & Co-Founder of Stylitics. His goal is to help consumers 
and retailers leverage the data in consumer closets to power smarter decision-
making, better recommendations, and in general, bring the fashion industry 
into the digital age. Rohan was selected as a 2014 New York City Fashion Fellow 
and has spoken on the intersection of fashion and data at events like NY Fashion 
Week and DataBeat. He has an MBA from the Wharton School.
STYLITICS is a fashion analytics company that leverages a proprietary stream 
of consumer closet data to help retailers improve CRM, recommendations, and 
targeting. Stylitics has built the world’s largest consumer clothing panel using 
its popular digital closet platform.

--- PAGE 24 ---
13
How would you define the role of a data analyst? How would 
you define the role of a data scientist?
As we see it, a data analyst is somebody who can sit down with a set of data, 
in some simple form like CSV, and is able to do two things. Firstly, understand 
the patterns and trends in the data. Secondly, be able to manipulate the data 
through various tools in order to understand the fundamentals of the dataset. 
That could be knowing about data that is missing, knowing additional data that 
is needed, or some other kind of insight about the characteristics of the data 
we’re working with. Basic tools like pivot tables are a requirement, but a good 
analyst is somebody who can come back to me and say “I’m worried because 
I’ve noticed that average price is too low for this product category. It tells me 
the data is weak here. Or maybe we’re counting blank entries as zeroes.” The 
best data analysts act like detectives. 
Given trends in technology are you requiring higher technical 
skills for your data analysts with languages such as R or SQL?
Knowing SQL is an advantage because it brings you one level closer to the 
database, allowing you to craft your questions in a way you are unable to when 
using pivot tables. Given that, I would rather find somebody who doesn’t know 
SQL but has a really good eye for finding patterns within the data, than find 
someone who is technically proficient but doesn’t have the right attitude or 
mindset towards it…that innate curiosity.
How would you define the role of a Data Scientist?
Data Scientist is a very broad term. Our company tends to approach it from a 
business intelligence perspective. At this point, we work with new data streams 
rather than trying to do very complex analysis on existing data streams. A data 
scientist shares the curiosity and intuition I mentioned for analysts, but is 
much more technically proficient and has a very sold grounding in statistics. 
They should be able to say, “Yes on the surface this looks like a trend but for 
this reason its not.” I would also look for someone who is comfortable with the 
latest machine learning methodologies and has applied those methods to real 
world data problems. 
How does your company use data analytics as a competitive 
advantage?

--- PAGE 25 ---
24
Our approach has always been different because we have a unique data set: 
post-purchase behavior in fashion, provided by consumers themselves. This is 
hugely valuable for retailers and has never been available before at scale. Our 
approach to data is to make it accessible and relevant for our end customer. We 
think of things from the customers’ point of view. What is the day-to-day of 
the fashion business? What is the data we have that relates to their business 
needs? Can we answer their questions better or faster than they can using the 
data that we have? We want to give them data they can pull up on demand in 
the 5 minutes before they go into a meeting.
We also try to be very disciplined on data cleanliness. There have been many 
chances to get more consumer-generated data with less cleanliness. For 
example, on our mobile apps we could let people simply write in the product 
name in a free-form text field versus making them select from dropdowns. 
It would make adding items easier and generate more data. But then we’d 
have much less ability to easily sort and categorize the data and provide useful 
insights. Other companies have opted to go with letting users tag photos in an 
unstructured way...as a result, our data set is marketable whereas theirs is not. 
Can you elaborate more on how analytics surfaces in your 
product?
Like the name says its style + analytics, so the analytics piece is baked into 
everything we’re doing. For example in our consumer platform, as you add 
your outfits to your calendar it’s calculating the cost-per-wear for each item of 
clothing and the number of times you’ve worn it. We also help you find brands 
that you may like from your friends through a similarity score. My personal 
opinion so far from everything we’ve seen is that you don’t need very heavy-
duty data science. There’s a simpler way to leverage your data to deliver a lot 
of value to users or customers. It’s just about understanding what data point is 
most useful to users of your product at that moment. 
So how is what you’re doing special in your industry? 
We specifically cater to the fashion industry that historically has been 
primarily an intuition driven business. Our approach is to bring competitive 
and consumer data to complement human expertise and intuition. It takes 
some education because retailers tend to be of two kinds: 1) The vast majority 
of retailers and brands in fashion who make their decisions mostly based on 
personal experience and opinion. 2) A newer set of retailers who track dozens 

--- PAGE 26 ---
25
of metrics religiously and base their decisions only on data. We’re helping 
companies to use a combination of data and human judgment, which is where 
I think the real success happens. 
What kind of interview questions would you ask to hire a data 
analyst?
We are actually in the process of hiring a couple analysts right now. First of 
all I want to know, have they worked with large data sets before and to what 
extent? The next thing I would do is show them a data set, for example all the 
details for the clothing purchases made by everybody in your university, and 
ask them what are the some of the insights you could get from that? I want 
to know how they structure the questions about data themselves, without 
prompting from me. e.g. “I know you asked only for the impact of weather on 
category sales, but I decided to also check if shades of color sales were affected 
by weather and found something interesting...” 
We will also give them a raw data set to take home and have them share five 
interesting things they see in the data. They would also be asked to present 
their findings in a couple of PowerPoint slides because part of the data analyst 
role according to me is being able to convey your findings to people who haven’t 
spent the time you have on the data.
What are your thoughts the development of technology 
outpacing the demand for data analysts? 
Yes, in a sense our technology removes some of the need for data collection 
and analysis by humans. That’s part of a macro trend. But with more companies 
focusing on personalization, targeting, CRM, and other data-driven approaches, 
the overall need for data-savvy people will grow as well. 
The existence of data mining and analysis technologies shouldn’t dissuade 
students. For example, spell check exists, but you still need to know how to 
spell words and use them in the right context… 
It’s important for everyone to know how to think about data, how to frame 
the right questions, and how to work with large datasets. All of that will serve 
you well regardless of the specific tools that are being used.

--- PAGE 27 ---
26
MARY ELLEN GORDON
DIRECTOR OF INSIGHTS AND ANALYTICS AT FLURRY
MARY ELLEN has spent her career in marketing-related research and analytics. 
She previously worked at Flurry and owned a market research company that 
conducted commercial, government, and academic research for clients in 
the U.S., U.K. and New Zealand. She has also worked in data-oriented jobs in 
technology, pharmaceutical, and consumer product companies. 
FLURRY is optimizing mobile experiences for people everywhere. Flurry’s 
market-leading analytics software is in over 400,000 smartphone and 
tablet apps on over 1.2 billion devices worldwide, giving the company deep 
understanding of mobile consumer behavior.

--- PAGE 28 ---
27
What led you to work in data analytics and why are you 
passionate about it?
For me it goes back to when I was an MBA student and took a marketing 
research course. At the time conjoint analysis, a form of tradeoff analysis, 
was gaining popularity. We gauged how much customers will pay for different 
features and how much they value one product attribute against the other. In 
doing so I saw the value of analysis when it came to making good marketing 
decisions. I realized I was more interested in the research side of marketing 
rather than the tactical side so I ended up doing my PhD and getting a lot more 
training in sophisticated analytical methods. Since then I have worked on the 
analytical side of marketing.
What aspects of your job at Flurry do you enjoy, and what 
aspects do you not enjoy?
Flurry has big data, and I enjoy seeing what I can do with that much data in 
terms of really honing in on differences that you might not be able to see with 
self-reported survey data. On the downside, the data management required 
when you have that much data is a bit annoying. I come from more of a survey 
research background where the data is much more clean and more structured. 
With our data there is a lot more work that goes into pulling the data you want 
off of our system. Sometimes that’s even impossible or requires an engineer. 
Sometimes the file that you generate is too big to open in a single computer. 
So before you do actual analysis, you have to do a lot of work to get it ready and 
into the format you need before you get to that “aha” moment.
That “aha” moment you’re describing, how often does it 
happen?
Some discoveries are more interesting than the others. They all kind of add 
to a bigger puzzle.  The smaller “aha” moments give you insights on different 
parts of the picture and then when you link discoveries together to get even 
more information you get the really cool insights that come from seeing the 
fuller picture.
Why should a recent grad work in this field, as opposed to a 
more traditional job?
I’m actually not sure they have to choose and I would almost encourage 
them not to choose. I believe what will be increasingly valuable in the future is 

--- PAGE 29 ---
not what is valuable now, but rather a combination of quantitative skills plus 
domain-specific skills (such as marketing). There probably will be more jobs 
for people with that combination of skills than for people who are in pure data 
science. Your data comes from a specific context; the context gives you clues as 
to what your data might be trying to tell you. The quantitative tools are there to 
help you better understand the context. 
How do you think the role of a data analyst has changed, since 
it has become popular, and how do you think it will evolve?
I think there will more emphasis on understanding statistics. Analysts will 
have to be able to tell you the best technique to extract answers, given a specific 
data set. People will have to know about the different assumptions in regression; 
what different distributions looks like and when to use different clustering 
algorithms. That kind of statistical knowledge will help you when you’re trying 
something and it isn’t working. It helps you diagnose the problem. Many data 
science people now have a more solid understanding of programming than 
statistics. Many people know R and Python and know how to fit a clustering 
algorithm to a data set, but lack much knowledge of the underlying statistics 
that they are applying so are almost using them as a black box.
How do you think your company uses data analytics as a 
comparative advantage to other companies?
One of our products is analytics, so in that sense we help provide a comparative 
advantage to other companies by helping them understand their users. Beyond 
that we are also taking the data we generate through our analytics product 
and using it to power advertising. The better our analytics are, the better we 
are going to be at showing ads that are relevant and interesting to you and 
therefore have a good return for advertisers. 
How soon do you think skills related to Big Data (i.e. Hadoop/
Hive/Pig) will be a necessary skill for data analysts?
It would awesome to have those skills now. I don’t know MapReduce and 
Hadoop and it would be really useful if I did because I would be much more self-
sufficient in terms of being able to go and get the data I need rather than being 
dependent on someone else to get it for me. Over time, I suspect that tools like 
Pig/Hive will get developed (and ones that are even more user friendly), that 
will let you query even very large non-relational databases without knowing the 
28

--- PAGE 30 ---
programming concepts behind them. The amount of data that we have and the 
uses for it are such that we can’t be dependent on the small number of people 
who have high-level programming skills. Also, if you’ve invested enough time 
in your career to have that level of software expertise you may not have subject 
matter and statistical expertise. What it gets down to at the moment is having 
a team of people who have these different skillsets. Over time, the tools will 
catch up and you won’t have to know how to program to get the data.
What do you look for in a data analyst, and what specific skills 
or experience do you favor? How do you interview them?
They would need to know in which context to apply what kind of tools. Do 
they know the context for factor analysis, or when regression is appropriate? 
The next step, now that you know which tools to apply when, is how do you 
deal with challenges such as your data is incomplete, or where you have results 
and they haven’t come out in a way that you expected. What is your process 
then? Do you have a process for checking for bad data? Finally I check for the 
ability to translate results from data to a solid explanation of “what does that 
mean”?
What is the range of technical ability do you look for?
The skills will depend on the specific job. It is unrealistic to expect everybody 
to have the domain expertise and the programming expertise and the statistical 
expertise. So what is the job, what are the specific skills that are required for 
them to perform, and what do they have already? What kind of person can we 
bring on to speed up the process we already have? For example right now we 
sometimes depend on engineers to get the data we need, so someone who knows 
MapReduce and Hadoop could speed up our workflow. If we had that person 
then we would probably look for someone with a strong statistical background 
to work with the data that is being pulled appropriately. Ultimately, I look for 
different skills depending on the situation and don’t expect the whole package 
in a single person. 
29

--- PAGE 31 ---
30
GREG LAMP
CO-FOUNDER + CTO AT YHAT
GREG graduated from University of Virginia with a B.S. in Systems Engineering 
as well as a B.A. in financial mathematics. He worked as a senior data analyst 
at comScore and also as a product manger at On Deck Capital. He is now the 
co-founder and CTO of Yhat.
YHAT is a cloud solution for deploying predictive analytics at your company. 
Data scientists create pipelines to ingest and clean data and train and deploy 
models. Models are instantly accessible via REST, low latency streaming API, 
and batch mode.

--- PAGE 32 ---
31
Based on you experience, how do data analysts differ from 
data scientists?
I generally lump them in the same category. This is because a lot of companies 
are saying that they are hiring “data scientists”, but they’re actually looking 
for entry-level data analysts. It is a sexier name; people want to become data 
scientists. I would classify a data analyst as someone who can use business 
intelligence to generate reports and metrics. Data scientists are capable of 
doing BI/reporting, but they can use statistic and machine learning techniques 
to better understand their data and business problems. I’ve also found that 
while a typical data analyst is comfortable gathering data from a pre-packaged 
source such as a data warehouse, data scientists are much more adept at 
collecting their own data via web scraping, surveys, etc.
Who do you foresee using your product: analysts, or data 
scientists? How will it improve the current process?
*Yhat empowers users to deploy production-ready statistical models to the cloud
Right now we’re catering to the data scientists. However we’re looking to 
expand and offer a tool that is more accessible to data analysts and business 
people. Once you go out in the industry, often times you’ll see data scientists’ 
works getting left on the shelf. There are engineering barriers where less 
technical people can’t utilize advanced analytical work. So we’re building a tool 
that will enable a company to utilize the prototypes that the data scientists 
built, and turn them into a deployed data product that can then be used by 
everyone in the company.
I think you’re implying that there is a technical gap between 
the new tools and the current generation of analysts. To fill 
this gap, will the tools become easier to use or will analysts 
have to become more technical?
I think it’ll go both ways. Having a technical analyst is very helpful. 
Nonetheless tools have also gotten better, particularly with python and R (to a 
lesser extent). Tools are becoming mainstream and easier to use. Ultimately, 
the idea of becoming “data scientists” is something data analysts are going to 
aspire to, thus pushing them to increase their technical abilities. It is getting 
easier for analysts to make the jump into technical analysts and eventually 
data scientists. 

--- PAGE 33 ---
32
There is also a wide spectrum of tools being built: from a excel plugin-ins to 
high-end machine learning platforms (namely GoodData, MapR, Cloudera etc). 
I strongly believe that there is no such thing as “data science in a box”. You can’t 
just take data and stick it into an algorithm that will predict everything (think 
Google prediction API). Therefore the humans in the process add tremendous 
value; these individuals provide domain expertise and make judgment calls. 
No matter where the industry goes, I think that both side of the equation (tools 
and analysts) are important.
So do you think that this space will always require human 
interaction?
Yes, I think certain activities will get easier and become automated, but we’re 
not going to get to a point where “plug in data science software” happens. 
From a recent graduates point of view, how do you develop 
the skills to work as a Data Analyst?
It depends on the industry and how technical you want to be. Learning R/
Python will never be a bad thing. The other aspect is picking up a project and 
doing it. That is the best way to pick up new skills. Without a defined goal, it is 
challenging to put in the extra effort to complete the project. For example, here 
is what I did when I was learning R: I picked a project, which was to automate 
our company’s quality control process. Up until then, they were manually 
made in excel. Ultimately pain and suffering lead to learning.
A lot of people have the idea that “domain specific knowledge” 
is more important than the statistics itself. Do you agree?
This actually comes up a lot when talking to colleagues: “is the data more 
important or the algorithm more important”.  I personally think that there 
is no replacement for domain specific knowledge.  I previously worked for 
OnDeck, where we used technology to improve the way small business loans 
were made. I learned that even if you have a bunch of data about the individual, 
it didn’t necessarily improve the lending process. What really matters is asking 
the right questions, and finding the right data to answer them.
Any last advice to our readers?
The good news is that breaking into the field is easy; we have a new hire 
starting in a month. He is a recent grad from San Francisco State University. He 

--- PAGE 34 ---
33
simply e-mailed me looking for a project to work on and started volunteering 
his own time. That is a great way to get exposure; startups are going to be open 
to people looking for work experience. Reach out and don’t be afraid. When we 
were starting Yhat, we emailed 20 companies seeking advice. Almost everyone 
was willing to meet with us. We got 10-15 meetings on the calendar during the 
first few days. People are generally very helpful.

--- PAGE 35 ---
34
ALI SYED
FOUNDER AND CEO AT PERSONTYLE
ALI is a data science enthusiast and transformation leader with more than a 
decade of experience assisting organizations in using insights and intelligent 
predications as a value amplifier. He loves drinking good coffee, reading great 
books and meeting interesting people.
PERSONTYLE was born from the idea of creating a platform for the people, by 
the people, to share passion, knowledge, theory and practices of scientifically 
analyzing data. Persontyle’s fundamental belief is that helping people learn 
and apply Data Science enables freedom, and yields important development 
benefits for individuals and society. Persontyle offers a comprehensive portfolio 
of Data Science learning opportunities and services for organizations (profit, 
non-profit, and government) to deliver breakthrough impact and meaningful 
value using data.

--- PAGE 36 ---
35
As someone who is offering coursework in data science, what 
do you think is the most important skill that an analyst has to 
acquire?
Fundamentally, what sets a creative data scientist apart from the rest is an 
obsession to challenge the status quo. Great data scientists never compromise 
with mediocrity. Not just data scientists, but all of us should be able to use data 
to ask relevant questions and challenge the way things have always been done. 
If we don’t break the rules then the rules will break us. There are too many 
mediocre and boring things in life to deal with and data science shouldn’t be 
one of them.
Data Science starts with creative imagination. Our ability to imagine and 
think beyond the obvious is one of our extraordinary powers as humans. It 
is why we are different from other beings on the planet. We are creatures of 
action; we build and create things. We don’t live in the world directly; we live 
our lives through our imagination, which is full of ideas, concepts, theories 
and ideologies.
One can learn tools and algorithms to deal with this data deluge and get hired 
based on skill-sets reflected on a resume, but you will only be able to add real 
and meaningful value based on your ability to improvise, adapt, and create. 
Last thing we need is a breed of data scientists who are too skills-centric and 
have not dwelled much on the idea of being the biggest skeptic of data. Before 
we end up with an army of tech-savvy data scientists who are nothing more 
than clever calculators, we need to ensure that data science remains a science 
and does not degrade into some gibberish practice that is more of a collection of 
techniques rather than a discipline. To conclude, if data science doesn’t require 
thinking, challenging, questioning, and rebelling, then it’s just a useless tech 
to protect status quo and mediocrity. 
Why did you decide to approach educating students in data 
science via in-person classes rather than an eLearning course 
or MOOC?
I was expecting this question. In the last 6 months I’ve been asked this 
question so many times that at one point I was seriously thinking about putting 
it on the back of my business card. I have a short answer and a long answer. 
Short answer is more positive and long answer includes detailed criticism.  

--- PAGE 37 ---
We encourage people to attend MOOCs and use any possible channel (i.e. 
do whatever it takes) to get as much information as you can. However I do 
think that the classroom style learning will always remain the best format for 
educating minds. MOOCs are not there to challenge the existing educational 
channels (universities and the like), but rather to complement them. Just 
like how eBooks will never replace books, MOOCs will never replace formal 
educations. And the day this happens, we may bid adieu to future and humanity. 
There are more than 2 billion potential learners around the world today, 
and more than 70% of them are unable to afford college degrees.  So we have 
to try all the possible means and channels to make education affordable and 
accessible to those people. MOOCs and eLearning are one of the ways to address 
this challenge. Also MOOCs are exciting people into trying new disciplines that 
they might have not previously had access to.
What is your opinion on using higher education to gain the 
skills necessary for Data Science?
Schools’ sole purpose is not to train us for industry. The thought that the 
sole purpose of education is to prepare us for industry is incorrect, limited and 
very capitalistic. Going to school is an absolute must; we won’t ever encourage 
a young professional not to go to school. Having said that, the challenge for all 
of us is making sure that the education we deliver is not commoditized. 
Since your company is based in London, have you found that 
the market for data scientists to be different in UK than in 
Silicon Valley?
Data science is an emerging discipline and has the potential to become a 
profound branch of knowledge. In the last year or two, we witnessed universities 
create departments and offer programs related to data science. This is not just 
happening in the US or Europe; in fact it’s happening everywhere. In Asia, 
Turkey, Middle East, just to the name the few. Data, as a fabric of this digital 
age, underpins all that we do. Using data as a strategic resource is essential 
for all, regardless of where you are geographically.  So it’s definitely not just 
restricted to the Silicon Valley.
How do you think the role of a data scientist will change in the 
next 5 years?
I can’t say anything about future with certainty. I can only speculate. I think 
36

--- PAGE 38 ---
the skills will become much more standardized and pervasive. 
Do you have any last advice for young professionals?
Be awesome, be yourself, read complex/complicated books, strive to learn 
the true meanings of life, break the rules, challenge the status quo, work on 
meaningful problems, fix the world, and create your own future. Remember to 
not waste a single moment of your life working on meaningless pursuits and 
listening to the BS of your bosses. 
37

--- PAGE 39 ---
38
DAVE GERSTER
VP OF DATA SCIENCE AT BIGML
DAVE is the VP of Data Science at BigML. He attended Harvard and also has an 
MBA from Haas School of Business. He has taken various roles at companies 
including Yahoo, Cloudera, Groupon and more.
BIGML offers a highly scalable, cloud based machine learning service that is 
easy to use, seamless to integrate and instantly actionable.

--- PAGE 40 ---
39
What problem is BigML trying to solve?
We’re trying to bring data science to a much larger audience. There’s been 
so much hype about the mythical “data scientist” who has a quantitative 
PhD, deep background in statistics and machine learning, mastery of both 
relational databases and Hadoop, the ability to program in Java and Python, 
and so forth.  These qualifications are extremely hard to find, so unless you’re 
Google, Facebook or LinkedIn, hiring a team with this background is simply 
not feasible. A better solution is just to give data analysts better tools, so they 
can do the deep analysis that was previously the domain of these scarce data 
scientists.
At BigML, we started with the area in data science called predictive modeling. 
We did this for two reasons. First, there are a lot of business problems that 
naturally take the form of trying to line up a collection of inputs with some 
known output.  Second, training a predictive model is a well-defined workflow 
that really lends itself to automation. You always start with a training set, use 
an algorithm to train a model, evaluate that model using holdout sets, and then 
maybe upgrade your model into an ensemble to get a better accuracy. Finally 
once you’re happy with your model, you use it to make predictions. Again, all 
of this falls into a well-defined and automatable workflow.
I think both data analysts and data scientists will like what we’ve created. With 
BigML, data analysts can now train predictive models, which was previously 
the domain of data science.  We even let you export your models to Tableau or 
Excel VBA, so you can make predictions using your favorite analytical tools.
Likewise, data scientists are liberated from the drudgery of model training 
and validation. This frees them up to worry about bigger problem. If you’re a 
data scientist wrestling with R on your laptop, BigML will greatly simplify your 
life: we give you an automated workflow, train your models on beefy server 
class machines in the cloud, and make it easy to export your models as code. 
We also have a powerful API that lets you integrate BigML with your existing 
workflow, so if you’re already doing everything in Python, that’s no problem.
What are the challenges for BigML when creating these tools?
The biggest overall challenge is design: we’re trying to take this complicated 
modeling process and make it simple for the end user. One specific challenge 
is making sure users don’t overfit their models, so we’ve paid a lot of attention 
to making model evaluation really easy. With BigML, you can evaluate a model 

--- PAGE 41 ---
40
using a holdout set in just a few mouse clicks. Personally, I’d like to reduce that 
to zero mouse clicks—just automatically run an evaluation in the background 
every time someone trains a model.
Are there problems that better tools can’t solve?
I think we’ll get to the point where BigML can train the best possible model 
with a single mouse click. The only constraint is how much computing power 
we provide on the backend, so I can easily envision something much more 
powerful and more automated than what we’re doing now. For example, you 
can extract a few more points of accuracy just by having the right number of 
nodes in your decision tree, or the right number of trees in your ensemble. 
Why not tune these parameters automatically? Again, it’s just a question of 
compute resources, which are constantly getting cheaper.
Would you say that BigML reduces the amount of statistical 
knowledge required to do advanced analyses?
I think there will always be demand for people who understand the theory 
behind statistics and machine learning. But in the future, these highly 
qualified people won’t spend their time on tasks that are automatable. If it’s 
automatable, then why do it manually?
Would you say that data analysts are one of the key audiences 
for BigML?
Yes, definitely. A data analyst has a good understanding of the business and 
wants to test out their hypotheses, but they don’t know the details of how 
a decision tree algorithm works, nor should they be expected to. An analyst 
does need to understand the concepts behind predictive modeling, and I think 
the simplicity of BigML helps with this understanding.  Ultimately, our goal 
is to liberate the analytical brainpower of these folks who already know the 
business, the data, and the right questions to ask.
There is a McKinsey report that predicts a 1.5M shortfall in 
“data-savvy analysts and managers”. What do you think is 
contributing to that shortfall?
Part of the challenge is that it’s hard to learn practical data skills in an 
academic environment. For example, the skills required to wrangle data into 
usable form aren’t something you learn in academia, even if you’re pursuing a 

--- PAGE 42 ---
quantitative degree.  You’ll undoubtedly learn a lot of valuable theory, but you 
probably won’t learn how to write a complicated SQL query.
Looking ahead, how do you see BigML’s business developing?
Mountains of data are just sitting untapped right now, at companies big 
and small.  Large companies have the most money at stake, so I see them as 
early adopters of BigML. As advanced data analysis continues to become more 
mainstream, I think smaller companies will contribute an increasing share of 
our business. These are companies who might be using Excel or Tableau, so 
BigML really opens up a whole new world of analysis for them. 
41

--- PAGE 43 ---
The Data Analytics Handbook:
Researchers + Academics Edition
COMING SOON
with interviews from...
and many more!
LEARN INSIGHT IN DATA
http://www.teamleada.com/
Peter Norvig
Director of Research 
at Google 
Hal Varian
Chief Economist 
at Google
Hod Lipson
#7 Most Powerful Data 
Scientist by Forbes

