--- PAGE 1 ---
What is Dimensional Model in Data 
Warehouse? 
What is Dimensional Model? 
A dimensional model is a data structure technique optimized for Data warehousing 
tools. The concept of Dimensional Modelling was developed by Ralph Kimball and 
is comprised of "fact" and "dimension" tables. 
A Dimensional model is designed to read, summarize, analyze numeric information 
like values, balances, counts, weights, etc. in a data warehouse. In contrast, 
relation models are optimized for addition, updating and deletion of data in a real-
time Online Transaction System. 
These dimensional and relational models have their unique way of data storage 
that has specific advantages. 
For instance, in the relational mode, normalization and ER models reduce 
redundancy in data. On the contrary, dimensional model arranges data in such a 
way that it is easier to retrieve information and generate reports. 
Hence, Dimensional models are used in data warehouse systems and not a good fit 
for relational systems. 
Elements of Dimensional Data Model 
Fact 
Facts are the measurements/metrics or facts from your business process. For a 
Sales business process, a measurement would be quarterly sales number 
Dimension 
Dimension provides the context surrounding a business process event. In simple 
terms, they give who, what, where of a fact. In the Sales business process, for the 
fact quarterly sales number, dimensions would be 

--- PAGE 2 ---
• Who – Customer Names 
• Where – Location 
• What – Product Name 
In other words, a dimension is a window to view information in the facts. 
Attributes 
The Attributes are the various characteristics of the dimension. 
In the Location dimension, the attributes can be 
• State 
• Country 
• Zipcode etc. 
Attributes are used to search, filter, or classify facts. Dimension Tables contain 
Attributes 
Fact Table 
A fact table is a primary table in a dimensional model. 
A Fact Table contains 
1. Measurements/facts 
2. Foreign key to dimension table 
Dimension table 
• A dimension table contains dimensions of a fact. 
• They are joined to fact table via a foreign key. 
• Dimension tables are de-normalized tables. 
• The Dimension Attributes are the various columns in a dimension table 
• Dimensions offers descriptive characteristics of the facts with the help of 
their attributes 
• No set limit set for given for number of dimensions 
• The dimension can also contain one or more hierarchical relationships 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Steps of Dimensional Modelling 
The accuracy in creating your Dimensional modeling determines the success of 
your data warehouse implementation. Here are the steps to create Dimension 
Model 
1. Identify Business Process 
2. Identify Grain (level of detail) 
3. Identify Dimensions 
4. Identify Facts 
5. Build Star 
The model should describe the Why, How much, When/Where/Who and What of 
your business process 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Step 1) Identify the business process 
Identifying the actual business process a data rehouse should cover. This could be 
Marketing, Sales, HR, etc. as per the data analysis needs of the organization. The 
selection of the Business process also depends on the quality of data available for 
that process. It is the most important step of the Data Modelling process, and a 
failure here would have cascading and irreparable defects. 
To describe the business process, you can use plain text or use basic Business 
Process Modelling Notation (BPMN) or Unified Modelling Language (UML). 
Step 2) Identify the grain 
The Grain describes the level of detail for the business problem/solution. It is the 
process of identifying the lowest level of information for any table in your data 
warehouse. If a table contains sales data for every day, then it should be daily 
granularity. If a table contains total sales data for each month, then it has monthly 
granularity. 
During this stage, you answer questions like 
1. Do we need to store all the available products or just a few types of 
products? This decision is based on the business processes selected for 
Datawarehouse 
2. Do we store the product sale information on a monthly, weekly, daily or 
hourly basis? This decision depends on the nature of reports requested by 
executives 
3. How do the above two choices affect the database size? 
Example of Grain: 
The CEO at an MNC wants to find the sales for specific products in different 
locations on a daily basis. 
So, the grain is "product sale information by location by the day." 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Step 3) Identify the dimensions 
Dimensions are nouns like date, store, inventory, etc. These dimensions are where 
all the data should be stored. For example, the date dimension may contain data 
like a year, month and weekday. 
Example of Dimensions: 
The CEO at an MNC wants to find the sales for specific products in different 
locations on a daily basis. 
Dimensions: Product, Location and Time 
Attributes: For Product: Product key (Foreign Key), Name, Type, Specifications 
Hierarchies: For Location: Country, State, City, Street Address, Name 
Step 4) Identify the Fact 
This step is co-associated with the business users of the system because this is 
where they get access to data stored in the data warehouse. Most of the fact table 
rows are numerical values like price or cost per unit, etc. 
Example of Facts: 
The CEO at an MNC wants to find the sales for specific products in different 
locations on a daily basis. 
The fact here is Sum of Sales by product by location by time. 
Step 5) Build Schema 
In this step, you implement the Dimension Model. A schema is nothing but the 
database structure (arrangement of tables). There are two popular schemas 
1. Star Schema 
The star schema architecture is easy to design. It is called a star schema because 
diagram resembles a star, with points radiating from a center. The center of the 
star consists of the fact table, and the points of the star is dimension tables. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The fact tables in a star schema which is third normal form whereas dimensional 
tables are de-normalized. 
 
2. Snowflake Schema 
The snowflake schema is an extension of the star schema. In a snowflake schema, 
each dimension are normalized and connected to more dimension tables. 
Rules for Dimensional Modelling 
• Load atomic data into dimensional structures. 
• Build dimensional models around business processes. 
• Need to ensure that every fact table has an associated date dimension table. 
• Ensure that all facts in a single fact table are at the same grain or level of 
detail. 
• It's essential to store report labels and filter domain values in dimension 
tables 
• Need to ensure that dimension tables use a surrogate key 
• Continuously balance requirements and realities to deliver business solution 
to support their decision-making 
Benefits of dimensional modeling 
• Standardization of dimensions allows easy reporting across areas of the 
business. 
• Dimension tables store the history of the dimensional information. 
• It allows to introduced entirely new dimension without major disruptions to 
the fact table. 
• Dimensional also to store data in such a fashion that it is easier to retrieve 
the information from the data once the data is stored in the database. 
• Compared to the normalized model dimensional table are easier to 
understand. 
• Information is grouped into clear and simple business categories. 
• The dimensional model is very understandable by the business. This model 
is based on business terms, so that the business knows what each fact, 
dimension, or attribute means. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
• Dimensional models are deformalized and optimized for fast data querying. 
Many relational database platforms recognize this model and optimize 
query execution plans to aid in performance. 
• Dimensional modeling creates a schema which is optimized for high 
performance. It means fewer joins and helps with minimized data 
redundancy. 
• The dimensional model also helps to boost query performance. It is more 
denormalized therefore it is optimized for querying. 
• Dimensional models can comfortably accommodate change. Dimension 
tables can have more columns added to them without affecting existing 
business intelligence applications using these tables. 
Summary: 
• A dimensional model is a data structure technique optimized for Data 
warehousing tools. 
• Facts are the measurements/metrics or facts from your business process. 
• Dimension provides the context surrounding a business process event. 
• The Attributes are the various characteristics of the dimension. 
• A fact table is a primary table in a dimensional model. 
• A dimension table contains dimensions of a fact. 
• There are three types of facts 1. Additive 2. Non-additive 3. Semi- additive . 
• Types of Dimensions are Conformed, Outrigger, Shrunken, Role-playing, 
Dimension to Dimension Table, Junk, Degenerate, Swappable and Step 
Dimensions. 
• Five steps of Dimensional modeling are 1. Identify Business Process 2. 
Identify Grain (level of detail) 3. Identify Dimensions 4. Identify Facts 5. Build 
Star 
• In Dimensional modeling, there is need to ensure that every fact table has an 
associated date dimension table. 
 

