--- PAGE 1 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 1 of 12 
 
What Is Data Warehousing? Types, 
Definition & Example 
What is Data Warehousing? 
A data warehousing is a technique for collecting and managing data from varied 
sources to provide meaningful business insights. It is a blend of technologies and 
components which allows the strategic use of data. 
It is electronic storage of a large amount of information by a business which is 
designed for query and analysis instead of transaction processing. It is a process of 
transforming data into information and making it available to users in a timely 
manner to make a difference. 
In this tutorial, you will learn- 
• What is Data Warehousing? 
• History of Datawarehouse 
• How Datawarehouse works? 
• Types of Data Warehouse 
• General stages of Data Warehouse 
• Components of Data warehouse 
• Who needs Data warehouse? 
• What Is a Data Warehouse Used For? 
• Steps to Implement Data Warehouse 
• Best practices to implement a Data Warehouse 
• Why We Need Data Warehouse? Advantages & Disadvantages 
• The Future of Data Warehousing 
• Data Warehouse Tools 
The decision support database (Data Warehouse) is maintained separately from 
the organization's operational database. However, the data warehouse is not a 
product but an environment. It is an architectural construct of an information 
system which provides users with current and historical decision support 
information which is difficult to access or present in the traditional operational 
data store. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 2 of 12 
 
The data warehouse is the core of the BI system which is built for data analysis and 
reporting. 
You many know that a 3NF-designed database for an inventory system many have 
tables related to each other. For example, a report on current inventory 
information can include more than 12 joined conditions. This can quickly slow 
down the response time of the query and report. A data warehouse provides a new 
design which can help to reduce the response time and helps to enhance the 
performance of queries for reports and analytics. 
Data warehouse system is also known by the following name: 
• Decision Support System (DSS) 
• Executive Information System 
• Management Information System 
• Business Intelligence Solution 
• Analytic Application 
• Data Warehouse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 3 of 12 
 
History of Datawarehouse 
The Datawarehouse benefits users to understand and enhance their organization's 
performance. The need to warehouse data evolved as computer systems became 
more complex and needed to handle increasing amounts of Information. However, 
Data Warehousing is a not a new thing. 
Here are some key events in evolution of Data Warehouse- 
• 1960- Dartmouth and General Mills in a joint research project, develop the 
terms dimensions and facts. 
• 1970- A Nielsen and IRI introduces dimensional data marts for retail sales. 
• 1983- Tera Data Corporation introduces a database management system 
which is specifically designed for decision support 
• Data warehousing started in the late 1980s when IBM worker Paul Murphy 
and Barry Devlin developed the Business Data Warehouse. 
• However, the real concept was given by Inmon Bill. He was considered as a 
father of data warehouse. He had written about a variety of topics for 
building, usage, and maintenance of the warehouse & the Corporate 
Information Factory. 
How Datawarehouse works? 
A Data Warehouse works as a central repository where information arrives from 
one or more data sources. Data flows into a data warehouse from the transactional 
system and other relational databases. 
Data may be: 
1. Structured 
2. Semi-structured 
3. Unstructured data 
The data is processed, transformed, and ingested so that users can access the 
processed data in the Data Warehouse through Business Intelligence tools, SQL 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 4 of 12 
 
clients, and spreadsheets. A data warehouse merges information coming from 
different sources into one comprehensive database. 
By merging all of this information in one place, an organization can analyze its 
customers more holistically. This helps to ensure that it has considered all the 
information available. Data warehousing makes data mining possible. Data mining 
is looking for patterns in the data that may lead to higher sales and profits. 
Types of Data Warehouse 
Three main types of Data Warehouses are: 
1. Enterprise Data Warehouse: 
Enterprise Data Warehouse is a centralized warehouse. It provides decision 
support service across the enterprise. It offers a unified approach for organizing 
and representing data. It also provides the ability to classify data according to the 
subject and give access according to those divisions. 
2. Operational Data Store: 
Operational Data Store, which is also called ODS, are nothing but data store 
required when neither Data warehouse nor OLTP systems support organizations 
reporting needs. In ODS, Data warehouse is refreshed in real time. Hence, it is 
widely preferred for routine activities like storing records of the Employees. 
3. Data Mart: 
A data mart is a subset of the data warehouse. It specially designed for a particular 
line of business, such as sales, finance, sales or finance. In an independent data 
mart, data can collect directly from sources. 
General stages of Data Warehouse 
Earlier, organizations started relatively simple use of data warehousing. However, 
over time, more sophisticated use of data warehousing begun. 
The following are general stages of use of the data warehouse: 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 5 of 12 
 
Offline Operational Database: 
In this stage, data is just copied from an operational system to another server. In 
this way, loading, processing, and reporting of the copied data do not impact the 
operational system's performance. 
Offline Data Warehouse: 
Data in the Datawarehouse is regularly updated from the Operational Database. 
The data in Datawarehouse is mapped and transformed to meet the 
Datawarehouse objectives. 
Real time Data Warehouse: 
In this stage, Data warehouses are updated whenever any transaction takes place 
in operational database. For example, Airline or railway booking system. 
Integrated Data Warehouse: 
In this stage, Data Warehouses are updated continuously when the operational 
system performs a transaction. The Datawarehouse then generates transactions 
which are passed back to the operational system. 
Components of Data warehouse 
Four components of Data Warehouses are: 
Load manager: Load manager is also called the front component. It performs with 
all the operations associated with the extraction and load of data into the 
warehouse. These operations include transformations to prepare the data for 
entering into the Data warehouse. 
Warehouse Manager: Warehouse manager performs operations associated with 
the management of the data in the warehouse. It performs operations like analysis 
of data to ensure consistency, creation of indexes and views, generation of 
denormalization and aggregations, transformation and merging of source data and 
archiving and baking-up data. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 6 of 12 
 
Query Manager: Query manager is also known as backend component. It performs 
all the operation operations related to the management of user queries. The 
operations of this Data warehouse components are direct queries to the 
appropriate tables for scheduling the execution of queries. 
End-user access tools: 
This is categorized into five different groups like 1. Data Reporting 2. Query Tools 3. 
Application development tools 4. EIS tools, 5. OLAP tools and data mining tools. 
Who needs Data warehouse? 
Data warehouse is needed for all types of users like: 
• Decision makers who rely on mass amount of data 
• Users who use customized, complex processes to obtain information from 
multiple data sources. 
• It is also used by the people who want simple technology to access the data 
• It also essential for those people who want a systematic approach for 
making decisions. 
• If the user wants fast performance on a huge amount of data which is a 
necessity for reports, grids or charts, then Data warehouse proves useful. 
• Data warehouse is a first step If you want to discover 'hidden patterns' of 
data-flows and groupings. 
What Is a Data Warehouse Used For? 
Here, are most common sectors where Data warehouse is used: 
Airline: 
In the Airline system, it is used for operation purpose like crew assignment, 
analyses of route profitability, frequent flyer program promotions, etc. 
Banking: 
It is widely used in the banking sector to manage the resources available on desk 
effectively. Few banks also used for the market research, performance analysis of 
the product and operations. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 7 of 12 
 
Healthcare: 
Healthcare sector also used Data warehouse to strategize and predict outcomes, 
generate patient's treatment reports, share data with tie-in insurance companies, 
medical aid services, etc. 
Public sector: 
In the public sector, data warehouse is used for intelligence gathering. It helps 
government agencies to maintain and analyze tax records, health policy records, 
for every individual. 
Investment and Insurance sector: 
In this sector, the warehouses are primarily used to analyze data patterns, 
customer trends, and to track market movements. 
Retain chain: 
In retail chains, Data warehouse is widely used for distribution and marketing. It 
also helps to track items, customer buying pattern, promotions and also used for 
determining pricing policy. 
Telecommunication: 
A data warehouse is used in this sector for product promotions, sales decisions and 
to make distribution decisions. 
Hospitality Industry: 
This Industry utilizes warehouse services to design as well as estimate their 
advertising and promotion campaigns where they want to target clients based on 
their feedback and travel patterns. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 8 of 12 
 
Steps to Implement Data Warehouse 
The best way to address the business risk associated with a Datawarehouse 
implementation is to employ a three-prong strategy as below 
1. Enterprise strategy: Here we identify technical including current 
architecture and tools. We also identify facts, dimensions, and attributes. 
Data mapping and transformation is also passed. 
2. Phased delivery: Datawarehouse implementation should be phased based 
on subject areas. Related business entities like booking and billing should be 
first implemented and then integrated with each other. 
3. Iterative Prototyping: Rather than a big bang approach to implementation, 
the Datawarehouse should be developed and tested iteratively. 
Here, are key steps in Datawarehouse implementation along with its deliverables. 
Step 
Tasks 
Deliverables 
1 
Need to define project scope 
Scope Definition 
2 
Need to determine business needs 
Logical Data Model 
3 
Define Operational Datastore requirements 
Operational Data Store Model 
4 
Acquire or develop Extraction tools 
Extract tools and Software 
5 
Define Data Warehouse Data requirements 
Transition Data Model 
6 
Document missing data 
To Do Project List 
7 
Maps Operational Data Store to Data Warehouse 
D/W Data Integration Map 
8 
Develop Data Warehouse Database design 
D/W Database Design 
9 
Extract Data from Operational Data Store 
Integrated D/W Data Extracts 
10 
Load Data Warehouse 
Initial Data Load 
11 
Maintain Data Warehouse 
On-going Data Access and Subsequent Loads 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 9 of 12 
 
Best practices to implement a Data Warehouse 
 
• Decide a plan to test the consistency, accuracy, and integrity of the data. 
• The data warehouse must be well integrated, well defined and time 
stamped. 
• While designing Datawarehouse make sure you use right tool, stick to life 
cycle, take care about data conflicts and ready to learn you're your mistakes. 
• Never replace operational systems and reports 
• Don't spend too much time on extracting, cleaning and loading data. 
• Ensure to involve all stakeholders including business personnel in 
Datawarehouse implementation process. Establish that Data warehousing is 
a joint/ team project. You don't want to create Data warehouse that is not 
useful to the end users. 
• Prepare a training plan for the end users. 
Why We Need Data Warehouse? Advantages & 
Disadvantages 
Advantages of Data Warehouse: 
• Data warehouse allows business users to quickly access critical data from 
some sources all in one place. 
• Data warehouse provides consistent information on various cross-functional 
activities. It is also supporting ad-hoc reporting and query. 
• Data Warehouse helps to integrate many sources of data to reduce stress on 
the production system. 
• Data warehouse helps to reduce total turnaround time for analysis and 
reporting. 
• Restructuring and Integration make it easier for the user to use for reporting 
and analysis. 
• Data warehouse allows users to access critical data from the number of 
sources in a single place. Therefore, it saves user's time of retrieving data 
from multiple sources. 
• Data warehouse stores a large amount of historical data. This helps users to 
analyze different time periods and trends to make future predictions. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 10 of 12 
 
Disadvantages of Data Warehouse: 
• Not an ideal option for unstructured data. 
• Creation and Implementation of Data Warehouse is surely time confusing 
affair. 
• Data Warehouse can be outdated relatively quickly 
• Difficult to make changes in data types and ranges, data source schema, 
indexes, and queries. 
• The data warehouse may seem easy, but actually, it is too complex for the 
average users. 
• Despite best efforts at project management, data warehousing project scope 
will always increase. 
• Sometime warehouse users will develop different business rules. 
• Organizations need to spend lots of their resources for training and 
Implementation purpose. 
The Future of Data Warehousing 
• Change in Regulatory constrains may limit the ability to combine source of 
disparate data. These disparate sources may include unstructured data 
which is difficult to store. 
• As the size of the databases grows, the estimates of what constitutes a very 
large database continue to grow. It is complex to build and run data 
warehouse systems which are always increasing in size. The hardware and 
software resources are available today do not allow to keep a large amount 
of data online. 
• Multimedia data cannot be easily manipulated as text data, whereas textual 
information can be retrieved by the relational software available today. This 
could be a research subject. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 11 of 12 
 
Data Warehouse Tools 
There are many Data Warehousing tools are available in the market. Here, are 
some most prominent one: 
1. MarkLogic: 
MarkLogic is useful data warehousing solution that makes data integration easier 
and faster using an array of enterprise features. This tool helps to perform very 
complex search operations. It can query different types of data like documents, 
relationships, and metadata. 
http://developer.marklogic.com/products 
2. Oracle: 
Oracle is the industry-leading database. It offers a wide range of choice of data 
warehouse solutions for both on-premises and in the cloud. It helps to optimize 
customer experiences by increasing operational efficiency. 
https://www.oracle.com/index.html 
3. Amazon RedShift: 
Amazon Redshift is Data warehouse tool. It is a simple and cost-effective tool to 
analyze all types of data using standard SQL and existing BI tools. It also allows 
running complex queries against petabytes of structured data, using the technique 
of query optimization. 
https://aws.amazon.com/redshift/?nc2=h_m1 
Here is a complete list of useful Datawarehouse Tools. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Ahmed Yasir Khan 
 
Page 12 of 12 
 
Conclusion: 
• The data warehouse works as a central repository where information is 
coming from one or more data sources. 
• Three main types of Data warehouses are Enterprise Data Warehouse, 
Operational Data Store, and Data Mart. 
• General state of a Datawarehouse are Offline Operational Database, Offline 
Data Warehouse, Real time Data Warehouse and Integrated Data Warehouse. 
• Four main components of Datawarehouse are Load manager, Warehouse 
Manager, Query Manager, End-user access tools 
• Datawarehouse is used in diverse industries like Airline, Banking, Healthcare, 
Insurance, Retail etc. 
• Implementing Datawarehouse is a 3 prong strategy viz. Enterprise strategy, 
Phased delivery and Iterative Prototyping. 
• Data warehouse allows business users to quickly access critical data from 
some sources all in one place. 
 

