--- PAGE 1 ---
Math of Deep Learning Neural Networks – Simpliﬁed
(Part 2)
· Roopam Upadhyay 4 Comments
The Math of Deep Learning Neural Networks – by Roopam
Welcome back to this series of articles on deep learning and neural networks. In the last part, you
learned how training a deep learning network is similar to a plumbing job. This time you will learn the
math of deep learning. We will continue to use the plumbing analogy to simplify the seemingly
complicated math. I believe you will ﬁnd this highly intuitive. Moreover, understanding this will provide
you with a good idea about the inner workings of deep learning networks and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)

--- PAGE 2 ---
to build an AI of your own. We will use the math of deep learning to make an image recognition AI in
the next part. But before that let’s create the links between…
The Math of Deep Learning and Plumbing
Last time we noticed that neural networks are like the networks of water pipes. The goal of neural
networks is to identify the right settings for the knobs (6 in this schematic) to get the right output given
the input.
Shown below is a familiar schematic of neural networks almost identical to the water pipelines above.
The only exception is the additional bias terms (b ,b , and b ) added to the nodes.
In this post, we will solve this network to understand the math of deep learning. Note that a deep
learning model has multiple hidden layers, unlike this simple neural network. However, this simple
neural network can easily be generalized to the deep learning models. The math of deep learning
does not change a lot with additional complexity and hidden layers. Here, our objective is to identify
the values of the parameters {W (W ,…, W ) and b (b ,b , and b )}. We will soon use the
1
2
3
1
6
1
2
3

--- PAGE 3 ---
backpropagation algorithm along with gradient descent optimization to solve this network and
identify the optimal values of these weights.
Backpropagation and Gradient Descent
In the previous post, we discussed that the
backpropagation algorithm works similar to me shouting
back at my plumber while he was working in the duct.
Remember, I was telling the plumber about the diﬀerence
in actual water pressure from the expected. The plumber
of neural networks, unlike my building’s plumber, learns
from this information to optimize the positions of the knobs.
The method that the neural networks plumber uses to
iteratively correct the weights or settings of the knobs is called gradient descent.
We have discussed the gradient descent algorithm in an earlier post to solve a logistic regression
model. I recommend that you read that article to get a good grasp of the things we will discuss in this
post. Essentially, the idea is to iteratively correct the value of the weights (W ) to produce the least
diﬀerence between the actual and the expected values of the output. This diﬀerence is measured
mathematically by the loss function i.e 
. The weights (W and b ) are then iteratively improved using
the gradient of the loss function wrt weights using this expression:
Here, α is called the learning rate – it’s a hyperparameter and stays constant. Hence, the overall
problem boils down to the identiﬁcation of partial derivatives of the loss function with respect to the
weights i.e. 
. For our problem, we just need to solve the partial derivatives for W and W . The
partial derivatives for other weights can then be easily derived using the same method used for W
and W .
Before we solve these partial derivatives, let’s do some more plumbing jobs and look at a tap to
develop intuitions about the results we will get from the gradient descent optimization.
Intuitive Math of Deep Learning for W
& A Tap
We will use this simple tap to identify an optimal setting for its knob. In this process, we will develop
intuitions about gradient descent and the math of deep learning. Here, the input is the water coming
from the pipe on the left of the image. Moreover, the output is the water coming out of the tap. You
use the knob, on the top of the tap, to regulate the quantity of the output water given the
input. Remember, you want to turn the knob in such a way that you get the desired output (i.e the
quantity of water) to wash your hands. Keep in mind, the position of the knob is similar to the weight of
a neural networks’ parameters. Moreover, the input/output water is similar to the input/output
variables.
i
i
i
5
1
5
1
5 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Essentially, in math terms, you are trying to identify how
the position of the knob inﬂuences the output water. The
mathematical equation for the same is:
If you understand the inﬂuence of the knob on the output
ﬂow of water you can easily turn it to get the desired
output. Now, let’s develop an intuition about how much to
twist the knob. When you use a tap you twist the knob
until you get the right ﬂow or the output. When the
diﬀerence between the desired output and the actual
output is large then you need a lot of twisting. On the other
hand, when the diﬀerence is less then you turn the knob
gently.
Moreover, the other factor on which your decision
depends on is the input from the left pipe. If there is no
water ﬂowing from the left pipe then no matter how much
you twist the knob it won’t help. Essentially, your action
depends on these two factors.
Your decision to turn the knob depends on 
Factor 1: Difference between the actual output and the desir
ed Output and 
Factor 2: Input from the grey pipe on the left 
Soon you will get the same result by doing a seemingly complicated math for the gradient descent to
solve the neural network.
For our network, the output diﬀerence is 
 and input is 
. Hence,
Disclaimer
Please note, to make the concepts easy for you to understand, I had taken a few liberties while
deﬁning the factors in the previous section. I will make these factors much more theoretically
grounded at the end of this article when I will discuss the chain rule to solve derivatives. For now, I will
continue to take more liberties in the next section when I discuss the other weight modiﬁcation for
other parameters of neural networks.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Add More Knobs to Solve W – Intuitive Math of Deep Learning
Neural networks, as discussed earlier, have several parameters (Ws and bs). To develop an intuition
about the math to estimate the other parameters further away from the output (i.e. W ), let’s add
another knob to the tap. 
 
Here, we have added a red regulator knob to the tap we saw in the earlier section. Now, the output
from the tap is governed by both these knobs. Referring to the neural network’s image shown earlier,
the red knob is similar to the parameters (W , W W , W
b
and b ) added to the hidden layers. The
knob on top of the brass tap is like the parameters to the output layer (i.e. W , W , and b ).
Now, you are also using the red knob, in addition to the knob on the tap, to get the desired output
from the tap. Your eﬀort of the red knob will depend on these factors.
Your decision to turn the red knob depends on 
Factor 1: Difference between the actual and the desired fina
l output and 
Factor 2: Position / setting of the knob on the brass tap an
d 
Factor 3: Change in input to the brass tap caused by the red 
knob and 
Factor 4: Input from the pipe on the left into the red knob 
Here, as already discussed earlier, factor 1 is 
. W is the setting/weight for the knob of the
brass tap. Factor 3 is 
. Finally, the last factor is the input or X . This completes our
equation as:
1
1
1
2,
3
4, 1, 
2
5
6
3
5
1

--- PAGE 6 ---
Now, before we do the math to get these results, we just need to discuss the components of our
neural network in mathematical terms. We already know how it relates to the water pipelines
discussed earlier.
Let’s start with the nodes or the orange circles in the network diagram.
Nodes of Neural Networks
Here, these two networks are equivalent except the additional b or bias for the neural networks.
The node for the neural network has two components i.e. sum and non-linear. The sum component
(Z ) is just a linear combination of the input and the weights.
The next term, i.e. non-linear, is the non-linear sigmoid activation function (
). As discussed earlier, it
is like a regulator of a fan that keeps the value of 
  between 0 and 1 or on/oﬀ.
1
1

--- PAGE 7 ---
The mathematical expression for this sigmoid activation function (
) is:
The nodes in both the hidden and output layer behave the same as described above. Now, the last
thing is to deﬁne the loss function (
) which is to measure the diﬀerence between the expected and
actual output. We will deﬁne the loss function for most common business problems.
Classiﬁcation Problem – Math of Deep Learning
In practice, most business problems are about classiﬁcation. They have binary or categorical
outputs/answers such as:
Is the last credit card transaction fraudulent or not?
Will the borrower return the money or not?
Was the last email in your mailbox a spam or ham?
Is that a picture of a dog or cat? (this is not a business problem but a famous problem for deep
learning)
Is there an object in front of an autonomous car to generate a signal to push the break?
Will the person surﬁng the web respond to the ad of a luxury condo?
Hence, we will design the loss function of our neural network for similar binary outputs. This binary
loss function, aka binary cross entropy, can easily be extended for multiclass problems with minor
modiﬁcations.
Loss Function and Cross Entropy
The loss function for binary output problems is:

--- PAGE 8 ---
This expression is also referred to as binary cross entropy. We can easily extend this binary cross-
entropy to multi-class entropy if the output has many classes such as images of dog, cat, bus, car etc.
We will learn about multiclass cross entropy and softmax function in the next part of this series. Now
that we have identiﬁed all the components of the neural network, we are ready to solve it using the
chain rule of diﬀerential equations.
Chain Rule for W – Math of Deep Learning
We discussed the outcome for change observed in the loss function(
) wrt to change in W earlier
using a single knob analogy. We know the answer to 
 is equal to  
. Now, let’s derive
the same thing using the chain rule of derivatives. Essentially, this is similar to the change in water
pressure observed at the output by turning the knob on the top of the tap. The chain rule states this:
The above equation for chain rule is fairly simple since equation on the right-hand side will become
the one on the left-hand side by simple division. More importantly, these equations suggest that the
change in the output essentially the change observed at diﬀerent components of the pipeline because
of turning the knob.
Moreover, we already discussed the loss function which is the binary cross entropy i.e.
The ﬁrst component of the chain rule is 
 which is
This was fairly easy to compute if you only know that derivative of a natural log function is
This second component of the step function is 
. This derivative of the sigmoid function ( 
) is
slightly more complicated.  You could ﬁnd here a detailed solution to the derivative of the sigmoid
function. This implies,
Finally, the third component of chain rule is again very easy to compute i.e.
Since we know,
5 
5 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Now, we just multiply these three components of the chain rule and we get the output i.e.
Chain Rule for W – Math of Deep Learning
The chain rule for the red knob or the additional layer is just an extension of the chain rule of the knob
on the top of the tap. This one has a few more components because the water has to travel through
more components i.e.
The ﬁrst two components are exactly the same as the knob of the tap i.e. W . This makes sense since
the water is ﬂowing through the same pipeline towards the end. Hence, we will calculate the third
component
The fourth component is the derivative of the sigmoid function i.e. the derivative of the sigmoid
function
The ﬁfth and the ﬁnal component is again easy to calculate.
That’s it. We now multiply these ﬁve components to get the results we have already seen for the
additional red knob.
Sign-oﬀ Node
This part of the series became a little math heavy. All this, however, will help us a lot when we  will
build an artiﬁcial intelligence to recognize images. See you then.
Share
1 
5


