--- PAGE 1 ---
                                                                                    https://career.guru99.com/
Top 50 Machine Learning Interview
Questions & Answers
1)      What is Machine learning?
Machine learning is a branch of computer science which deals with system programming in order to
automatically learn and improve with experience.  For example: Robots are programed so that they
can perform the task based on data they gather from sensors. It automatically learns programs from
data.
2)      Mention the diﬀerence between Data Mining and Machine learning?
Machine learning relates with the study, design and development of the algorithms that give
computers the capability to learn without being explicitly programmed.  While, data mining can be
deﬁned as the process in which the unstructured data tries to extract knowledge or unknown
interesting patterns.  During this process machine, learning algorithms are used.
3)      What is ‘Overﬁtting’ in Machine learning?
In machine learning, when a statistical model describes random error or noise instead of underlying
relationship ‘overﬁtting’ occurs.  When a model is excessively complex, overﬁtting is normally
observed, because of having too many parameters with respect to the number of training data types.
The model exhibits poor performance which has been overﬁt.
4)      Why overﬁtting happens?
The possibility of overﬁtting exists as the criteria used for training the model is not the same as the
criteria used to judge the eﬃcacy of a model.
5)      How can you avoid overﬁtting ?
By using a lot of data overﬁtting can be avoided, overﬁtting happens relatively as you have a small
dataset, and you try to learn from it. But if you have a small database and you are forced to come
with a model based on that. In such situation, you can use a technique known as cross validation. In
this method the dataset splits into two section, testing and training datasets, the testing dataset will
only test the model while, in training dataset, the datapoints will come up with the model.
In this technique,  a model is usually given a dataset of a known data on which training (training data
set) is run and a dataset of unknown data against which the model is tested. The idea of cross
validation is to deﬁne a dataset to “test” the model in the training phase.
6)      What is inductive machine learning?
The inductive machine learning involves the process of learning by examples, where a system, from a
set of observed instances tries to induce a general rule.

--- PAGE 2 ---
7)      What are the ﬁve popular algorithms of Machine Learning?
a)      Decision Trees
b)      Neural Networks (back propagation)
c)       Probabilistic networks
d)      Nearest Neighbor
e)      Support vector machines
8)      What are the diﬀerent Algorithm techniques in Machine Learning?
The diﬀerent types of techniques in Machine Learning are
a)      Supervised Learning
b)      Unsupervised Learning
c)       Semi-supervised Learning
d)      Reinforcement Learning
e)      Transduction
f)       Learning to Learn
9)      What are the three stages to build the hypotheses or model in machine learning?
a)      Model building
b)      Model testing
c)       Applying the model
10)   What is the standard approach to supervised learning?
The standard approach to supervised learning is to split the set of example into the training set and
the test.
11)   What is ‘Training set’ and ‘Test set’?
In various areas of information science like machine learning, a set of data is used to discover the
potentially predictive relationship known as ‘Training Set’. Training set is an examples given to the
learner, while Test set is used to test the accuracy of the hypotheses generated by the learner, and it
is the set of example held back from the learner. Training set are distinct from Test set.
12)   List down various approaches for machine learning?
The diﬀerent approaches in Machine Learning are
a)      Concept Vs Classiﬁcation Learning
b)      Symbolic Vs Statistical Learning

--- PAGE 3 ---
c)       Inductive Vs Analytical Learning
13)   What is not Machine Learning?
a)      Artiﬁcial Intelligence
b)      Rule based inference
14)   Explain what is the function of ‘Unsupervised Learning’?
a)      Find clusters of the data
b)      Find low-dimensional representations of the data
c)       Find interesting directions in data
d)      Interesting coordinates and correlations
e)      Find novel observations/ database cleaning
15)   Explain what is the function of ‘Supervised Learning’?
a)      Classiﬁcations
b)      Speech recognition
c)       Regression
d)      Predict time series
e)      Annotate strings
16)   What is algorithm independent machine learning?
Machine learning in where mathematical foundations is independent of any particular classiﬁer or
learning algorithm is referred as algorithm independent machine learning?
17)   What is the diﬀerence between artiﬁcial learning and machine learning?
Designing and developing algorithms according to the behaviours based on empirical data are known
as Machine Learning.  While artiﬁcial intelligence in addition to machine learning, it also covers other
aspects like knowledge representation, natural language processing, planning, robotics etc.
18)   What is classiﬁer in machine learning?
A classiﬁer in a Machine Learning is a system that inputs a vector of discrete or continuous feature
values and outputs a single discrete value, the class.
19)   What are the advantages of Naive Bayes?
In Naïve Bayes classiﬁer will converge quicker than discriminative models like logistic regression, so
you need less training data.  The main advantage is that it can’t learn interactions between features.
20)   In what areas Pattern Recognition is used?
Pattern Recognition can be used in

--- PAGE 4 ---
a)      Computer Vision
b)      Speech Recognition
c)       Data Mining
d)      Statistics
e)      Informal Retrieval
f)       Bio-Informatics
21)   What is Genetic Programming?
Genetic programming is one of the two techniques used in machine learning. The model is based on
the testing and selecting the best choice among a set of results.
22)   What is Inductive Logic Programming in Machine Learning?
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) is a subﬁeld of machine learning which uses logical programming
representing background knowledge and examples.
23)   What is Model Selection in Machine Learning?
The process of selecting models among diﬀerent mathematical models, which are used to describe
the same data set is known as Model Selection. Model selection is applied to the ﬁelds of statistics,
machine learning and data mining.
24)   What are the two methods used for the calibration in Supervised Learning?
The two methods used for predicting good probabilities in Supervised Learning are
a)      Platt Calibration
b)      Isotonic Regression
These methods are designed for binary classiﬁcation, and it is not trivial.
25)   Which method is frequently used to prevent overﬁtting?
When there is suﬃcient data ‘Isotonic Regression’ is used to prevent an overﬁtting issue.
26)   What is the diﬀerence between heuristic for rule learning and heuristics for decision
trees?
The diﬀerence is that the heuristics for decision trees evaluate the average quality of a number of
disjointed sets while rule learners only evaluate the quality of the set of instances that is covered with
the candidate rule.
27)   What is Perceptron in Machine Learning?
In Machine Learning, Perceptron is an algorithm for supervised classiﬁcation of the input into one of
several possible non-binary outputs.
28)   Explain the two components of Bayesian logic program?

--- PAGE 5 ---
Bayesian logic program consists of two components.  The ﬁrst component is a logical one ; it consists
of a set of Bayesian Clauses, which captures the qualitative structure of the domain.  The second
component is a quantitative one, it encodes the quantitative information about the domain.
29)   What are Bayesian Networks (BN) ?
Bayesian Network is used to represent the graphical model for probability relationship among a set of
variables .
30)   Why instance based learning algorithm sometimes referred as Lazy learning
algorithm?
Instance based learning algorithm is also referred as Lazy learning algorithm as they delay the
induction or generalization process until classiﬁcation is performed.
31)   What are the two classiﬁcation methods that SVM ( Support Vector Machine) can
handle?
a)      Combining binary classiﬁers
b)      Modifying binary to incorporate multiclass learning
32)   What is ensemble learning?
To solve a particular computational program, multiple models such as classiﬁers or experts are
strategically generated and combined. This process is known as ensemble learning.
33)   Why ensemble learning is used?
Ensemble learning is used to improve the classiﬁcation, prediction, function approximation etc of a
model.
34)   When to use ensemble learning?
Ensemble learning is used when you build component classiﬁers that are more accurate and
independent from each other.
35)   What are the two paradigms of ensemble methods?
The two paradigms of ensemble methods are
a)      Sequential ensemble methods
b)      Parallel ensemble methods
36)   What is the general principle of an ensemble method and what is bagging and
boosting in ensemble method?
The general principle of an ensemble method is to combine the predictions of several models built
with a given learning algorithm in order to improve robustness over a single model.  Bagging is a
method in ensemble for improving unstable estimation or classiﬁcation schemes.  While boosting
method are used sequentially to reduce the bias of the combined model.  Boosting and Bagging both
can reduce errors by reducing the variance term.
37)   What is bias-variance decomposition of classiﬁcation error in ensemble method?

--- PAGE 6 ---
The expected error of a learning algorithm can be decomposed into bias and variance. A bias term
measures how closely the average classiﬁer produced by the learning algorithm matches the target
function.  The variance term measures how much the learning algorithm’s prediction ﬂuctuates for
diﬀerent training sets.
38)   What is an Incremental Learning algorithm in ensemble?
Incremental learning method is the ability of an algorithm to learn from new data that may be
available after classiﬁer has already been generated from already available dataset.
39)   What is PCA, KPCA and ICA used for?
PCA (Principal Components Analysis), KPCA ( Kernel based Principal Component Analysis) and ICA (
Independent Component Analysis) are important feature extraction techniques used for
dimensionality reduction.
40)   What is dimension reduction in Machine Learning?
In Machine Learning and statistics, dimension reduction is the process of reducing the number of
random variables under considerations and can be divided into feature selection and feature
extraction
41)   What are support vector machines?
Support vector machines are supervised learning algorithms used for classiﬁcation and regression
analysis.
42)   What are the components of relational evaluation techniques?
The important components of relational evaluation techniques are
a)      Data Acquisition
b)      Ground Truth Acquisition
c)       Cross Validation Technique
d)      Query Type
e)      Scoring Metric
f)       Signiﬁcance Test
43)   What are the diﬀerent methods for Sequential Supervised Learning?
The diﬀerent methods to solve Sequential Supervised Learning problems are
a)      Sliding-window methods
b)      Recurrent sliding windows
c)       Hidden Markow models
d)      Maximum entropy Markow models
e)      Conditional random ﬁelds

--- PAGE 7 ---
f)       Graph transformer networks
44)   What are the areas in robotics and information processing where sequential
prediction problem arises?
The areas in robotics and information processing  where sequential prediction problem arises are
a)      Imitation Learning
b)      Structured prediction
c)       Model based reinforcement learning
45)   What is batch statistical learning?
Statistical learning techniques allow learning a function or predictor from a set of observed data that
can make predictions about unseen or future data. These techniques provide guarantees on the
performance of the learned predictor on the future unseen data based on a statistical assumption on
the data generating process.
46)   What is PAC Learning?
PAC (Probably Approximately Correct) learning is a learning framework that has been introduced to
analyze learning algorithms and their statistical eﬃciency.
47)    What are the diﬀerent categories you can categorized the sequence learning
process?
a)      Sequence prediction
b)      Sequence generation
c)       Sequence recognition
d)      Sequential decision
48)   What is sequence learning?
Sequence learning is a method of teaching and learning in a logical manner.
49)   What are two techniques of Machine Learning ?
The two techniques of Machine Learning are
a)      Genetic Programming
b)      Inductive Learning
50)   Give a popular application of machine learning that you see on day to day basis?
The recommendation engine implemented by major ecommerce websites uses Machine Learning
 Guru99  Provides  FREE ONLINE TUTORIAL   on Various courses like

--- PAGE 8 ---
Java
MIS
MongoDB
BigData
Cassandra
Web Services
SQLite
JSP
Informatica
Accounting
SAP Training
Python
Excel
ASP Net
HBase
Project
Management
Test Management
Business Analyst
Ethical Hacking
PMP
Live Project
SoapUI
Photoshop
Manual Testing
Mobile Testing
Data Warehouse
R Tutorial
Tableau
DevOps
AWS
Jenkins
Agile Testing
RPA
JUnit
Software
Engineering
Selenium
CCNA
AngularJS
NodeJS
PLSQL
                                     

