--- PAGE 1 ---
O
Interview Prep: 40 Artificial 
Intelligence Questions
ver the last decade, artificial intelligence (AI) has grown 
from a pipe dream into the driving force behind the fourth 
industrial revolution. If you browse through the world’s 
leading job boards, you’ll find that it’s at the heart of some of the 
most in-demand tech careers today.
“Everyone’s trying to figure out ways to optimize their businesses and 
their practices, and how to automate and make their day-to-day lives 
a little bit easier, or a little bit more productive and functional,” 
www.springboard.com
20 mins read

--- PAGE 2 ---
notes Stephen Zafarino, vice president of national recruiting at 
Mondo.
So, whether your next job interview is related to data science, 
machine learning (ML), or deep learning (DL), you can bet that artifi-
cial intelligence questions will come up.
Artificial Intelligence Questions: 
Categories
Because it’s a broad area of computer science, AI questions will keep 
popping up in various job interview scenarios. To make it easier for 
you to navigate through this space, we have curated a list of questions 
about artificial intelligence and divided them into multiple categories. 
So whether you’re hoping to move up the data science career ladder 
or looking to start your first machine learning internship, make sure 
that you brush up on these AI interview questions and answers so you 
can walk into your next interview oozing confidence.
Artificial Intelligence Questions: 
Introduction to AI
If your AI interview is for an internship, there’s a good chance that 
the interviewer will try to break the ice and make you feel more com-
fortable by asking some “simple” general interest questions. 
These types of questions usually cover the basics, so even if they 
sound straightforward, you have to make sure that you don’t get 
stumped (seemingly simple questions require that your answer be 

--- PAGE 3 ---
delivered easily and flawlessly). However, it can quickly get more 
involved, so you have to be ready for whatever they throw at you.
Related: The Most Common Machine Learning Terms, Explained
1. What is artificial intelligence?
AI can be described as an area of computer science that simulates 
human intelligence in machines. It’s about smart algorithms making 
decisions based on the available data. 
Whether it’s Amazon’s Alexa or a self-driving car, the goal is to mimic 
human intelligence at lightning speed (and with a reduced rate of 
error).
More reading: What is AI? Everything you need to know about Artifi-
cial Intelligence
2. What are intelligent agents?
An intelligent agent is an autonomous entity that leverages sensors to 
understand a situation and make decisions. It can also use actuators 
to perform both simple and complex tasks.
In the beginning, it might not be so great at performing a task, but it 
will improve over time. The Roomba vacuum cleaner is an excellent 
example of this. 
More reading: Intelligent agents defending for an IoT world
3. What’s the most popular programming language 
used in AI?
The open-source modular programming language Python leads the AI 
industry because of its simplicity and predictable coding behavior. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Its popularity can be attributed to open-source libraries like Mat-
plotlib and NumPy, efficient frameworks such as Scikit-learn, and 
practical version libraries like Tensorflow and VTK.
There’s a chance that the interviewer might keep the conversation 
going and ask you for more examples. If that happens, you can men-
tion the following:
• Java
• Julia
• Haskell
• Lisp
More reading: The 5 Best Programming Languages for AI
4. What are AI neural networks?
Neural networks in AI mathematically model how the human brain 
works. This approach enables the machine to think and learn as 
humans do. This is how smart technology today recognizes speech, 
objects, and more.  
More reading: Exploring Neural Networks with Activation Atlases
5. What’s the difference between strong AI and weak 
AI?
The difference between the two is just like the terms sound. Strong AI 
can successfully imitate human intelligence and is at the core of 
advanced robotics. 
Weak AI can only predict specific characteristics that resemble human 
intelligence. Alexa and Siri are excellent examples of weak AI.
Strong AI 
• Can be applied widely 
• Extensive scope

--- PAGE 5 ---
• Human-level intelligence
• Processes data by using clustering and association
Weak AI
• Can be great at performing some simple tasks
• Uses both supervised and unsupervised learning
• The scope can be minimal
More reading: What’s the Difference Between Weak and Strong AI?
6. What’s the difference between AI and ML?
(Source)
AI and ML are closely related, but these terms aren’t interchangeable. 
ML actually falls under the umbrella of AI. It demands that machines 
carry out tasks in the same way that humans do. 
The current application of ML in AI is based around the idea that we 
should enable access to data so machines can observe and learn for 
themselves.
More reading: What’s the Difference between Machine Learning and 
AI?

--- PAGE 6 ---
7. How would you describe ML to a non-technical 
person?
ML is geared toward pattern recognition. A great example of this is 
your Facebook newsfeed and Netflix’s recommendation engine. 
In this scenario, ML algorithms observe patterns and learn from 
them. When you deploy an ML program, it will keep learning and 
improving with each attempt.
If the interviewer prods you to provide more real-world examples, 
you can list the following:
• Amazon product recommendations
• Fraud detection
• Search ranking
• Spam detection
• Spell correction
More reading: How do you explain Machine Learning and Data Mining 
to Non-Computer Science people?
8. What are some examples of AI in use?
Some compelling examples of AI applications are:
• Chatbots
• Facial recognition
• Image tagging
• Natural language processing
• Sales prediction
• Self-driving cars
• Sentiment analysis
More reading: Ask the AI experts: What are the applications of AI?

--- PAGE 7 ---
9. What’s a Turing test?
The Turing test, named after Alan Turing, is a method of testing a 
machine’s human-level intelligence. For example, in a human-versus-
machine scenario, a judge will be tasked with identifying which ter-
minal was occupied by a human and which was occupied by a 
computer based on individual performance. 
Whenever a computer can pass off as a human, it’s deemed intelli-
gent. The game has since evolved, but the premise remains the same. 
More reading: The Turing Test
10. What’s TensorFlow?
TensorFlow is an open-source framework dedicated to ML. It’s a com-
prehensive and highly adaptable ecosystem of libraries, tools, and 
community resources that help developers build and deploy ML-pow-
ered applications. Both AlphaGo and Google Cloud Vision were built 
on the Tensorflow platform.
More reading: TensorFlow Tutorial from Scratch: Building a Deep 
Learning Model on Fashion MNIST Dataset (Part 1)
11. Why is game theory important to AI?
Game theory, developed by American mathematician Josh Nash, is 
essential to AI because it plays an underlying role in how these smart 
algorithms improve over time. 
At its most basic, AI is about algorithms that are deployed to find 
solutions to problems. Game theory is about players in opposition try-
ing to achieve specific goals. As most aspects of life are about compe-
tition, game theory has many meaningful real-world applications. 
These problems tend to be dynamic. Some game theory problems are 
natural candidates for AI algorithms. So, whenever game theory is 

--- PAGE 8 ---
applied, multiple AI agents that interact with each other will only 
care about utility to itself. 
Data scientists within this space should be aware of the following 
games:
• Symmetric vs. asymmetric
• Perfect vs. imperfect information
• Cooperative vs. non-cooperative
• Simultaneous vs. sequential
• Zero-sum vs. non-zero-sum
More reading: What is the connection between Game Theory and AI?
12. In your opinion, how will AI impact application 
development?
These types of questions help the interviewer ascertain your level of 
interest in the field. If you’re naturally passionate about AI and every-
thing related to it, you should have some knowledge about current 
industry trends. 
So, if you have been actively following this space, you’ll know all 
about AIOps. In the coming months, you can expect AI to be more 
involved in how we build applications. It has the potential to trans-
form how we use and manage the infrastructure at a micro and macro 
level. 
Some say that DevOps will be replaced by what they are calling AIOps 
because it allows developers to engage in accurate root cause analysis 
by combining big data, ML, and visualization. 
AIOps can be described as a multilayered platform that can be used to 
automate and improve IT operations. In this scenario, developers can 
leverage analytics and ML to collect and process data from a variety 
of sources. This information can then be analyzed in real time to 
identify and rectify problems.

--- PAGE 9 ---
(Source)
More reading: AIOps: Is DevOps Ready for an Infusion of Artificial 
Intelligence?
13. What would you say are common misconceptions 
about AI?
Many AI-related misconceptions are making the rounds in the age of 
“fake news.” The most common ones are:
• AI will replace humans
• AI systems aren’t safe
• AI will lead to significant unemployment

--- PAGE 10 ---
While these types of stories are common, they’re far from the truth. 
Even though some AI-based technology is able to complete some 
tasks—for example, analyzing zettabytes of data in less than a 
second—it still needs humans to gather the data and define the pat-
terns for identification. 
So we aren’t near a reality where technology has the potential to 
replace us or our jobs. 
More reading: What’s Behind the Hype About Artificial Intelligence?
14. Can you name the properties of a good knowledge 
representation system?
From the perspective of systems theory, a good knowledge represen-
tation system will have the following:
• Acquisition efficiency to acquire and incorporate new data
• Inferential adequacy to derive knowledge representation 
structures like symbols when new knowledge is learned 
from old knowledge
• Inferential efficiency to enable the addition of data into 
existing knowledge structures to help the inference process
• Representation adequacy to represent all the knowledge 
required in a specific domain
More reading: Knowledge representation in AI
15. What are the different types of keys in a 
relational database?
There are a variety of keys in a relational database, including:
• Alternate keys are candidate keys that exclude all primary 
keys.

--- PAGE 11 ---
• Artificial keys are created by assigning a unique number to 
each occurrence or record when there aren’t any compound 
or standalone keys.
• Compound keys are made by combining multiple elements 
to develop a unique identifier for a construct when there 
isn’t a single data element that uniquely identifies 
occurrences within a construct. Also known as a composite 
key or a concatenated key, compound keys consist of two or 
more attributes.
• Foreign keys are groups of fields in a database record that 
point to a key field or a group of fields that create a key of 
another database record that’s usually in a different table. 
Often, foreign keys in one table refer to primary keys in 
another. As the referenced data can be linked together quite 
quickly, it can be critical to database normalization.
• Natural keys are data elements that are stored within 
constructs and utilized as primary keys.
• Primary keys are values that can be used to identify unique 
rows in a table and the attributes associated with them. For 
example, these can take the form of a Social Security 
number that’s related to a specific person. In a relational 
model of data, the primary key is the candidate key. It’s also 
the primary method used to identify a tuple in each possible 
relation.
• Super keys are defined in the relational model as a set of 
attributes of a relation variable. It holds that all relations 
assigned to that variable don’t have any distinct tuples. 
They also don’t have the same values for the attributes in 
the set. Super keys also are defined as a set of attributes of 
a relational variable upon which all of the functionality 
depends.
More reading: What are the different types of keys in RDBMS?

--- PAGE 12 ---
Artificial Intelligence Questions: 
Statistics
AI, ML, and data science all have a great deal of overlap, so it’s crucial 
to cover all bases before your AI interview. However, it’s important to 
note that these fields aren’t interchangeable. Although everything is 
relative, AI produces actions, ML produces predictions, and data sci-
ence produces insights.
So what kind of potential data science-related AI questions should you 
be prepared for? Let’s take a look. 
16. In Python’s standard library, what packages 
would you say are the most useful for data 
scientists? 
Python wasn’t built for data science. However, in recent years it has 
grown to become the go-to programming language for the following:
• Machine learning
• Predictive analytics
• Simple data analytics 
• Statistics
For data science projects, the following packages in the Python stand-
ard library will make life easier and accelerate deliveries:
• NumPy (to process large multidimensional arrays, 
extensive collections of high-level mathematical functions, 
and matrices)
• Pandas (to leverage built-in methods for rapidly combining, 
filtering, and grouping data)
• SciPy (to extend NumPy’s capabilities and solve tasks 
related to integral calculus, linear algebra, and probability 
theory)

--- PAGE 13 ---
More reading: 20 Python Interview Questions and Answers—Start Pre-
paring for Your Ideal Job
17. What is collaborative filtering?
Collaborative filtering can be described as a process of finding pat-
terns from available information to build personalized recommenda-
tions. You can find collaborative filtering in action when you visit 
websites like Amazon and IMDB.
Also known as social filtering, this approach essentially makes sug-
gestions based on the recommendations and preferences of other peo-
ple who share similar interests. 
More reading: Collaborative Filtering
18. Can you list some disadvantages related to linear 
models?
There are many disadvantages to using linear models, but the main 
ones are:
• Errors in linearity assumptions 
• Lacks autocorrelation
• It can’t solve overfitting problems 
• You can’t use it to calculate outcomes or binary outcomes
More reading: What are the limitations of linear regression modeling 
in data analysis?
19. What’s a feature vector?
A feature vector is an n-dimensional vector that contains essential 
information that describes the characteristics of an object. For exam-
ple, it can be an object’s numerical features or a list of numbers taken 
from the output of a neural network layer. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
In AI and data science, feature vectors can be used to represent 
numeric or symbolic characteristics of an object in mathematical 
terms for seamless analysis.
Let’s break this down. A data set is usually organized into multiple 
examples where each example will have several features. However, a 
feature vector won’t have the same feature for numerous examples. 
Instead, each example will correspond to one feature vector that will 
contain all the numerical values for that example object. 
Feature vectors are often stacked into a design matrix. In this sce-
nario, each row will be a feature vector for one example. Each column 
will feature all the examples that correspond to that particular fea-
ture. This means that it will be like a matrix, but with just one row 
and multiple columns (or a single column and multiple rows) like 
[1,2,3,5,6,3,2,0].
More reading: Extract a feature vector for any image with PyTorch
20. What are the typical characteristics of elements 
in a list and a dictionary?
In lists, elements maintain their order unless they are explicitly com-
manded to re-order. These can be made up of any data type that can 
be all the same or mixed. However, elements in lists can only be 
accessed via numeric, zero-based indices.
In a dictionary, the order isn’t guaranteed. However, each entry will 
be assigned a key and a value. As a result, elements within a diction-
ary can be accessed by using their individual key.
So whenever you have a set of unique keys, you have to use a diction-
ary. Whenever a collection of items are in order, you can use a list.
It’s difficult to predict how an AI interview will unfold, so if they fol-
low up by asking you how to get a list of all the keys in a dictionary, 
respond with the following:

--- PAGE 15 ---
To obtain a list of keys in a dictionary, you’ll have to use the following 
function keys():
mydict={‘a’:1,’b’:2,’c’:3,’e’:5}
mydict.keys()
dict_keys([‘a’, ‘b’, ‘c’, ‘e’])
More reading: How to Sort Python Dictionaries by Key or Value
21. What’s selection bias? What other types of biases 
could you encounter during sampling?
When you’re dealing with a non-random sample, selection bias will 
occur due to flaws in the selection process. This happens when a sub-
set of the data is consistently excluded because of a particular attrib-
ute. This exclusion will distort results and influence the statistical 
significance of the test.
Other types of biases include survivorship bias and undercoverage 
bias. It’s important to always consider and reduce such biases 
because you’ll want your smart algorithms to make accurate predic-
tions based on the data.
More reading: Mitigating Bias in AI Models
22. What’s a random forest? Could you explain its 
role in AI?
A random forest is a data construct that’s applied to ML projects to 
develop a large number of random decision trees while analyzing var-
iables. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
(Source)
These algorithms can be leveraged to improve the way technologies 
analyze complex data sets. The basic premise here is that multiple 
weak learners can be combined to build one strong learner. 
This is an excellent tool for AI and ML projects because it can work 
with large labeled and unlabeled data sets with a large number of 
attributes. It can also maintain accuracy when some data is missing. 
As it can model the importance of attributes, it can be used for dimen-
sionality reduction.
More reading: Machine Learning With Random Forest
23. What’s an eigenvalue? What about an 
eigenvector?
The directions along which a particular linear transformation com-
presses, flips, or stretches is called eigenvalue. Eigenvectors are used 
to understand these linear transformations. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
For example, to make better sense of the covariance of the covariance 
matrix, the eigenvector will help identify the direction in which the 
covariances are going. The eigenvalues will express the importance of 
each feature. 
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors are both critical to computer vision and 
ML applications. The most popular of these is known as principal 
component analysis for dimensionality reduction (e.g., eigenfaces for 
face recognition).
More reading: What are eigenvectors and eigenvalues?
24. Would you use batch normalization? If so, can 
you explain why?
The idea here is to standardize the data before sending it to another 
layer. This approach helps reduce the impact of previous layers by 
keeping the mean and variance constant. It also makes the layers 
independent of each other to achieve rapid convergence. For example, 
when we normalize features from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 100, it helps 
accelerate the learning cycle.
Check out this video: Why Does Batch Normalization Work?
Artificial Intelligence Questions: 
Programming
AI interview questions are bound to enter the sphere of programming 
sooner rather than later. So let’s dive right into it with the following 
AI questions and answers.

--- PAGE 18 ---
25. What’s a hash table?
There are two parts to a hash table. The first is an array, or the actual 
table where the data is stored, and the other is a mapping function 
that’s known as the hash function. 
It’s a data structure that implements an associative array abstract 
data type that can map key values. It can also compute an index into 
an array of slots or buckets where the desired value can be found.
(Source)
More reading: Basics of Hash Tables
26. What are the different algorithm techniques you 
can use in AI and ML?
Some algorithm techniques that can be leveraged are:
• Learning to learn
• Reinforcement learning (deep adversarial networks, 
q-learning, and temporal difference)
• Semi-supervised learning

--- PAGE 19 ---
• Supervised learning (decision trees, linear regression, naive 
bayes, nearest neighbor, neural networks, and support 
vector machines)
• Transduction
• Unsupervised learning (association rules and k-means 
clustering)
More reading: Types of Machine Learning Algorithms You Should 
Know
27. How would you go about choosing an algorithm 
to solve a business problem?
First, you have to develop a “problem statement” that’s based on the 
problem provided by the business. This step is essential because it’ll 
help ensure that you fully understand the type of problem and the 
input and the output of the problem you want to solve.
The problem statement should be simple and no more than a single 
sentence. For example, let’s consider enterprise spam that requires 
an algorithm to identify it. 
The problem statement would be: “Is the email fake/spam or not?”
In this scenario, the identification of whether it’s fake/spam will be 
the output.
Once you have defined the problem statement, you have to identify 
the appropriate algorithm from the following:
• Any classification algorithm
• Any clustering algorithm
• Any regression algorithm
• Any recommendation algorithm
Which algorithm you use will depend on the specific problem you’re 
trying to solve. In this scenario, you can move forward with a cluster-

--- PAGE 20 ---
ing algorithm and choose a k-means algorithm to achieve your goal of 
filtering spam from the email system.
While examples aren’t always necessary when answering questions 
about artificial intelligence, sometimes it will help make it easier for 
you to get your point across.
More reading: How to Choose ML Algorithm: Machine Learning Ques-
tions & Answers Part – III
28. When is it necessary to update an algorithm?
You should update an algorithm when the underlying data source has 
been changed or whenever there’s a case of non-stationarity. The 
algorithm should also be updated when you want the model to evolve 
as data streams through the infrastructure.
More reading: “The data has been changed” error when stepping from 
main form into subform
29. What’s regularization?
When you have underfitting or overfitting issues in a statistical 
model, you can use the regularization technique to resolve it. Regular-
ization techniques like LASSO help penalize some model parameters if 
they are likely to lead to overfitting.
If the interviewer follows up with a question about other methods 
that can be used to avoid overfitting, you can mention cross-valida-
tion techniques such as k-folds cross-validation. 
Another approach is to keep the model simple by taking into account 
fewer variables and parameters. Doing this helps remove some of the 
noise in the training data.
More reading: Machine Learning Explained: Regularization

--- PAGE 21 ---
30. What’s the difference between inductive, 
deductive, and abductive learning?
Inductive learning describes smart algorithms that learn from a set 
of instances to draw conclusions. In statistical ML, k-nearest neighbor 
and support vector machine are good examples of inductive learning.
There are three literals in (top-down) inductive learning: 
• Arithmetic literals
• Equality and inequality
• Predicates
In deductive learning, the smart algorithms draw conclusions by fol-
lowing a truth-generating structure (major premise, minor premise, 
and conclusion) and then improve them based on previous decisions. 
In this scenario, the ML algorithm engages in deductive reasoning 
using a decision tree.
Abductive learning is a DL technique where conclusions are made 
based on various instances. With this approach, inductive reasoning 
is applied to causal relationships in deep neural networks.
More reading: What’s the difference between “inductive, “deductive” 
and “abductive” reasoning?
31. What steps would you take to evaluate the 
effectiveness of your ML model?
You have to first split the data set into training and test sets. You also 
have the option of using a cross-validation technique to further seg-
ment the data set into a composite of training and test sets within the 
data.
Then you have to implement a choice selection of the performance 
metrics like the following:

--- PAGE 22 ---
• Confusion matrix
• Accuracy
• Precision
• Recall or sensitivity
• Specificity
• F1 score
For the most part, you can use measures such as accuracy, confusion 
matrix, or F1 score. However, it’ll be critical for you to demonstrate 
that you understand the nuances of how each model can be measured 
by choosing the right performance measure to match the problem.
More reading: Performance Metrics for Classification problems in 
Machine Learning
32. What would you do if data in a data set were 
missing or corrupted?
Whenever data is missing or corrupted, you either replace it with 
another value or drop those rows and columns altogether. In Pandas, 
both isNull() and dropNA() are handy tools to find missing or cor-
rupted data and drop those values. You can also use the fillna()
method to fill the invalid values in a placeholder—for example, “0.”
More reading: 5 Ways To Handle Missing Values In Machine Learning 
Datasets
33. Do you know how to build a simple neural 
network? Can you demonstrate how you would do it 
with Python code?
These types of questions are designed to ascertain your programming 
skills. If you’re a coding ninja, you should be able to achieve this with 
nine lines of Python code.

--- PAGE 23 ---
(Source)
More reading: How to build a simple neural network in 9 lines of 
Python code
34. Can you write a Python program to draw the 
flower shown below?
(Source)

--- PAGE 24 ---
Again, the interviewer is trying to test your coding skills. It’s always 
good to perceive these types of questions as an opportunity to show a 
potential employer what you can do. So demonstrate your program-
ming skills without hesitation and with confidence. 
(Source)
More reading: Drawing a flower with python turtle
Artificial Intelligence Questions: General 
AI Interest
The tech talent shortage has created fierce demand for your skills, but 
to land your “dream job” it’ll help if you can demonstrate your pas-
sion for the field. Whether your next scheduled AI interview is with a 
startup or an established tech giant, be ready for wide-ranging ques-
tions like the ones listed below.

--- PAGE 25 ---
35. Do you have research experience in AI?
At present, a lot of work within the AI space is research-based. As a 
result, many organizations will be digging into your background to 
ascertain what kind of experience you have in this area. If you 
authored or co-authored research papers or have been supervised by 
industry leaders, make sure to share that information.
In fact, take it a step further and have a summary of your research 
experience along with your research papers ready to share with the 
interviewing panel. 
However, if you don’t have any formal research experience, have an 
explanation ready. For example, you can talk about how your AI jour-
ney started as a weekend hobby and grew into so much more within a 
space of two or three years.
36. What’s the last AI-related research paper you 
read? What were your conclusions?
If you’re passionate about AI, you have to keep up with scientific 
research within the field. An excellent place to start is by following 
ScienceDirect to keep track of published research papers along with 
what’s in the pipeline.

--- PAGE 26 ---
(Source)
37. What’s your favorite use case?
Just like research, you should be up to date on what’s going on in the 
industry. As such, if you’re asked about use cases, make sure that you 
have a few examples in mind that you can share. Whenever possible, 
bring up your personal experiences. 
You can also share what’s happening in the industry. For example, if 
you’re interested in the use of AI in medical images, Health IT Analyt-
ics has some interesting use cases:
• Detecting Fractures And Other Musculoskeletal Injuries
• Aiding In The Diagnosis Neurological Diseases
• Flagging Thoracic Complications And Conditions
• Screening For Common Cancers
38. What conferences are you hoping to attend this 
year? Any keynote speeches you’re hoping to catch?
Conferences are great places to network, attend workshops, learn, 
and grow. So if you’re planning to stick to a career in artificial intelli-
gence, you should be going to some of these. For example, Deep 
Learning World has a great one every summer. 
This year’s event in Las Vegas will feature keynote speakers like Dr. 
Dyann Daley (founder and CEO of Predict Align Prevent), Siddha 
Ganju (solutions architect at Nvidia), and Dr. Alex Glushkovsky (prin-
cipal data scientist at BMO Financial Group, and others). 
39. How is Google training data for self-driving cars?
If you’re interested and heavily involved within this space, this ques-
tion should be a no-brainer. If you know the answer, it’ll demonstrate 
your knowledge about a variety of ML methods and how ML is applied 

--- PAGE 27 ---
to autonomous vehicles. But even if you don’t know the answer, take 
a stab at it as it will show your creativity and inventive nature. 
Google has been using reCAPTCHA to source labeled data on store-
fronts and traffic signs for many years now. The company also has 
been using training data collected by Sebastian Thrun, CEO of the 
Kitty Hawk Corporation and the co-founder (and former CEO) of 
Udacity. 
Such information, although it might not seem significant, will show a 
potential employer that you’re interested and excited about this field.
More reading: Google X: Leveraging data and algorithms for self-driv-
ing cars
40. Where do you usually source your data sets?
If you talk about AI projects that you’ve worked on in your free time, 
the interviewer will probably ask where you sourced your data sets. If 
you’re genuinely passionate about the field, you would have worked 
on enough projects to know where you can find free data sets.
For example, here are some freely available public data sets that you 
should know about (without conducting a Google search):
• CelebFaces (with 200,000 celebrity images along with 40 
attribute annotations)
• CIFAR (with 60,000 images that map 10 different classes)
• YouTube-8M (with over 4,000 annotated entities taken 
from an enormous data set of YouTube videos)
Researchers have released hundreds of free resources like these along 
with the actual network architecture and weights used in their exam-
ples. So it will serve you well to explore some of these data sets and 
run some experiments before heading out for an AI interview.
More reading: How to find datasets for Artificial Intelligence training

