--- PAGE 1 ---
 
A Beginner’s Guide to 
Getting Your First Data 
Science Job 
2019 Edition 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Introduction
2 
The Foundations of Data Science
5 
The Different Data Science Roles
7 
The Data Science Process
11 
Data Scientists in Action
17 
What You Need to Learn to Become a Data Scientist
20 
Data Science Skills
20 
Data Science Tools
2​4 
Bringing Tools Into the Data Science Process
3​3 
Starting Your Job Search
39 
How to Build a Data Science Portfolio and Resume
39 
How to Network and Build a Personal Brand
42 
Ace the Data Science Interview
46 
Paths Into Data Science
54 
Conclusion
59 
Additional Resources
60 
 
 
 
 
1 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 
Introduction 
Six years after the Harvard Business Review dubbed it "​the sexiest job of the 
21st century​," data scientist remains one of the most sought-after roles in 
business. 
Explosive growth in the volume of data has impacted every business sector, 
driving up the number of data science professionals required to help 
companies uncover the insights they need to stay competitive.  
●Job postings for data scientists ​rose 75 percent​ on Indeed.com 
between January 2015 and January 2018.  
●LinkedIn calculated that in August 2018 employers were seeking 
151,717 more data scientists​ than existed in the U.S.  
●By 2020, the number of jobs for all U.S. data professionals will ​increase 
by 364,000​ openings to 2,720,000, according to research from IBM.  
 
These often prove to be tricky job openings to fill. It takes an average of five 
days longer to close data scientist and data analyst roles than the market 
average, causing employers to pay premium salaries for qualified 
professionals. 
A typical data scientist job pays about ​$119,000​ at the midpoint of salaries 
and rises to $168,000 at the 95th percentile, according to staffing agency 
Robert Half Technology. 
 
2 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
 
That’s partly why Glassdoor named data scientist the best job in America for 
the third consecutive year in 2018 (with the number of job openings and 
overall job satisfaction ratings also weighed in). 
Clearly, data science is still “sexy.” But it’s evolving, thanks in large part to the 
ongoing artificial intelligence (AI) revolution. 
While it used to be the stuff of sci-fi, AI is now so widespread that most 
non-technical people are familiar with the term and making AI a part of their 
everyday lives—thanks to virtual assistants like Siri and Alexa, translation 
tools used while traveling, and other seamless product integrations. 
Advances in AI and machine learning are expected to dramatically impact 
virtually every industry, creating as many as ​2.3 million​ new jobs by 2020, 
according to Gartner.  
AI is powering innovation, helping companies develop new business-critical 
solutions and services to optimize insights and improve the consumer 
experience. Businesses need more machine learning experts who can 
continually improve forecasting models to gain an edge over the 
competition. 
To keep up with these changes in business and within data science, skills 
will need to shift. 
At Springboard, we work to bridge the world’s skills gap with flexible and 
affordable education. Through our self-paced, mentor-guided online 
workshops, we have helped thousands of people start and advance careers 
in data science, including machine learning roles. 
 
3 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
 
As part of our mission to make high-quality education accessible for all and 
to help people advance their careers, we created this guide to careers in data 
science in 2016—and have comprehensively updated it for 2019. Our goal is 
to bring you insights from our network of industry experts that will demystify 
data science careers. Maybe we’ll even inspire some of you to pursue a 
career in this fascinating field. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
 
The Foundations of Data Science 
DJ Patil, who built the first data science team at LinkedIn before becoming 
the first chief data scientist of the United States in 2015, coined the modern 
version of the term “data scientist” with Jeff Hammerbacher (Facebook’s 
early data science lead) in 2008. 
Patil has put it this way: 
“A data scientist is that unique blend of skills that can both unlock the 
insights of data and tell a fantastic story via the data.” 
A decade after it was first used, the term remains contested. There is ​some 
debate​ among practitioners and academics about what “data science” 
means and whether it’s different from the data analytics and statistics that 
companies have long prioritized. 
One of the most substantive differences, however, is the amount of data 
processed now as opposed to a decade ago. In 2020, the world will generate 
50 times more data than we generated in 2011—on average, Google now 
processes more than 60,000 searches every second (5.5 billion per day). 
With that in mind, data science can be considered an interdisciplinary 
solution to the explosion of data that takes old data analytics approaches 
and uses machines to augment and scale their effects on larger data sets. 
So, what does a typical data scientist look like? Patil posits that “the 
dominant trait among data scientists is an intense curiosity—a desire to go 
beneath the surface of a problem, find the questions at its heart, and distill 
them into a very clear set of hypotheses that can be tested.” 
5 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
 
Notice that there is no mention here of a strict definition of data science, nor 
of a profile that must fit it.  
Think about this: Baseball players used to be judged by how good scouts 
thought they looked, not how many times they got on base—that was until 
2002, when the Oakland A’s won an all-time league record 20 games in a row 
with one of the lowest-paid rosters in the league. And elections used to 
swing from party to party with little semblance of predictive accuracy—that 
was until Nate Silver correctly predicted every electoral vote in the 2012 
elections. (2016 was… a little more complicated.) 
Data, and a systematic approach to uncover truths about the world around 
us, have changed the world. 
“More than anything, what data scientists do is make discoveries while 
swimming in data. It’s their preferred method of navigating the world around 
them,” concludes Patil. 
To do data science, you have to be able to find and process large data sets. 
You’ll often need to understand and use programming, math, and technical 
communication skills. 
Most importantly, you need to have a sense of intellectual curiosity to 
understand the world through data, and not be deterred easily by obstacles. 
 
 
6 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 
 
The Different Data Science Roles 
Before we dive too deep into what skills you need to become a data scientist, 
you should be aware of the different roles within the expanding field of data 
science. While some small companies can call upon a jack-of-all-trades data 
scientist, more often a data science team will rely on different team 
members for accomplishing different tasks.  
While there are some basics every data scientist should know (e.g., basic 
statistics), data science roles can vary significantly in their demands and 
expectations. 
Let’s look at the some broad categories of roles that often get lumped under 
the umbrella term “data science.” 
 
Data Scientists 
One definition of a data scientist is someone who knows more programming 
than a statistician, and more statistics than a software engineer. Data 
scientists fine-tune the statistical and mathematical models that are applied 
onto that data. This could involve applying theoretical knowledge of 
statistics and algorithms to find the best way to solve a data problem. For 
instance, a data scientist might use historical data to build a model that 
predicts the number of credit card defaults in the following month. 
A data scientist will be able to run data science projects from beginning to 
end. They can identify a business problem, store and clean large amounts of 
data, explore data sets to identify insights, build predictive models, and 
weave a story around the findings.  
7 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
 
Within the broad category of data scientists, you might encounter 
statisticians​ who emphasize statistical approaches to data and ​data 
managers​ who focus on running data science teams. 
Data scientists are the bridge between programming and implementation of 
data science, the theory of data science, and the business implications of 
data.  
Their average base pay is just below $140,000 USD, according to Glassdoor.  
 
Data Engineers 
Data engineers are software engineers who handle large amounts of data, 
and often lay the groundwork and plumbing for data scientists to do their 
jobs effectively. They are responsible for managing database systems, 
scaling the data architecture to multiple servers, and writing complex queries 
to sift through the data. They might also clean up data sets and implement 
complex requests that come from data scientists, e.g., they take the 
predictive model from the data scientist and implement it into 
production-ready code. 
Data engineers, in addition to knowing a breadth of programming languages 
(e.g., Ruby or Python), will usually know some Hadoop-based technologies 
(e.g., MapReduce, Hive, and Pig) and database technologies like MySQL, 
Cassandra, and MongoDB. 
Within the broad category of data engineers, you’ll find ​data architects​ who 
focus on structuring the technology that manages data models and 
database administrators​ who focus on managing data storage solutions. 
8 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
 
Their average base pay is higher than data scientists’, based on Glassdoor 
data: $151,000 USD. 
 
Data / Business Analysts 
Data analysts sift through data and provide reports and visualizations to 
explain what insights the data is hiding. When somebody helps people from 
across the company understand specific queries with charts, they are filling 
the data analyst (or business analyst) role. In some ways, you can think of 
them as junior data scientists, or the first step on the way to a traditional 
data science job. 
Business analysts are a group that’s adjacent to data analysts, and are more 
concerned with the business implications of the data and the actions that 
should result. Should the company invest more in project X or project Y? 
Business analysts will leverage the work of data science teams to 
communicate an answer. 
Their average base pay is around $84,000 USD, according to Glassdoor, 
partly because many roles are filled by entry-level graduates with limited 
work experience. 
 
Machine Learning Engineer 
Machine learning engineers are highly sought after and command an annual 
median salary of $115,000, according to Glassdoor (note that this is a much 
narrower job function than the previous titles). They’re mostly responsible 
for building, deploying, and managing machine learning projects. 
9 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 
 
 
Most machine learning roles will require the use of Python or C/C++ (though 
Python is often preferred). Background in the theory behind machine 
learning algorithms and an understanding of how they can be efficiently 
implemented in terms of both space and time is critical.  
The easiest path to a career as a machine learning engineer, though by no 
means the only one, is to start off with a software engineering background 
and then gain the statistics and machine learning knowledge needed to take 
on the role. Some also begin as academics more involved with machine 
learning theory who then develop their software engineering skills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
 
The Data Science Process 
What exactly does a data scientist do? It’s a big question with many possible 
answers. So we turned to Raj Bandyopadhyay, Springboard’s data science 
expert-in-residence and former chief data scientist at Pindrop Security. Turns 
out, he employs an incredibly helpful framework that is both a way to 
understand what data scientists do and a cheat sheet to break down any 
data science problem. 
He calls it “the data science process,” which he outlines in an easy-to-follow, 
seven-day ​email course​, updated in 2018. Here’s a summary of his insights. 
 
Step 1: Frame the problem 
The first thing you have to do before you solve a problem is define exactly 
what it is. As a data scientist, you’ll often get ambiguous inputs from the 
people coming to you for help, so you have to work with them and ask the 
right questions to get to the bottom of the issue.  
Say you’re solving a problem for your company’s VP of sales. She wants you 
to help optimize the sales funnel. You’ll want to start with the basics: 
●Who are the customers and how do you identify them? 
●What does the sales process look like right now? 
●What kind of information does the company collect about potential 
customers? 
11 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
 
Once you have a reasonable grasp of the domain, ask more pointed 
questions. In this case, you ask, “What part of the funnel is not optimized 
right now?” 
She tells you she wants her team to spend more time with the customers 
who are most likely to convert. She also wants to figure out why some 
customer segments are not converting well. 
Bingo! You can now see the data science in the problem. And you can frame 
the VP’s request into data science questions: 
●What are the important customer segments? 
●How do conversion rates differ across these segments? Do some 
perform significantly better or worse than others? 
●How can we predict if a prospective customer is going to buy the 
product? 
●Can we identify customers who might be on the fence? 
The next step for you is to figure out what data you have available to answer 
these questions.  
 
Step 2: Collect the right data 
In most data science projects, you will be using data that already exists and 
is being collected. In this case, you find out that most of the customer data 
generated by the sales department is stored in the company’s customer 
relationship management (CRM) software, and managed by the sales 
operations team. The backend for the CRM tool is a SQL database with 
12 

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
 
several tables. However, the tool also provides a very convenient web-based 
API that returns data in the popular JSON format. 
What data from the CRM database do you need? How should you extract it? 
What format should you store the data in to perform your analysis? 
You decide to roll up your sleeves and dive into the SQL database. You find 
that the system stores detailed identity, contact, and demographic 
information about customers, in addition to details of the sales process for 
each of them. You decide that since the data set is not too large, you’ll 
extract it to CSV files for further analysis. 
 
Step 3: Process the data for analysis 
Well, now you have your data. But before you draw any conclusions from it, 
you need to subject it to some data wrangling. 
Data can be quite messy, especially if it hasn’t been well-maintained. You’ll 
see errors that will corrupt your analysis: values set to null though they really 
are zero, duplicate values, and missing values. It’s up to you to go through 
and check your data to make sure you’ll get accurate insights. You’ll want to 
check for the following common errors: 
1. Missing values 
2. Corrupted values 
3. Time zone differences 
4. Date range errors, such as data registered from before sales started 
13 

--- PAGE 15 ---
 
 
Finally, after a lot of wrangling, you’re done cleaning your data set, and you’re 
ready to start drawing some insights.  
 
Step 4: Explore the data 
Time to dive in! This step is called exploratory data analysis. 
The difficulty here isn’t coming up with ideas to test, it’s coming up with 
ideas that are likely to turn into insights. You’ll have a fixed deadline for your 
project, so the pressure is on. 
You look at the original request: predict which future prospects are likely to 
convert. What if you split the data into two segments based on whether the 
customer converted or not and examine differences between the two 
groups?  
Right away, you start noticing some interesting patterns. You notice that 
there is a large number of customers in their early 30s and far fewer in their 
20s, even though the product was designed with the younger audience in 
mind. Furthermore, many of the customers who converted were targeted via 
email marketing campaigns as opposed to social media. It’s also clear that 
customers in their 20s are being targeted mostly via social media.  
Now you can begin to trace patterns you can analyze more deeply.  
 
Step 5: Perform in-depth analysis 
You have enough information to create a model to predict which customers 
will buy the product. 
14 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
 
In order to create a predictive model, you must use techniques from 
machine learning. In this case, you have to create a predictive model that 
compares your underperforming group with your average customer. You 
might find out that the age and social media activity are significant factors in 
predicting who will buy the product. 
You begin to see that the way the product has been has been marketed is 
significantly affecting sales: maybe this problem group isn’t a lost cause! A 
change in tactics away from social media marketing could change 
everything for the better. This is something you’ll have to flag to your VP of 
sales. 
You can now combine all of those qualitative insights with data from your 
quantitative analysis to craft a story that moves people to action. 
 
Step 6: Communicate your results 
Communication is one of the most underrated skills a data scientist can 
have. While some of your colleagues can get away with being siloed in their 
technical bubbles, data scientists must be able to communicate with other 
teams and effectively translate their work for maximum impact. This set of 
skills is often called data storytelling. 
So what kind of story can you tell based on the work you’ve done so far? 
First, you take the data on the current prospects that the sales team is 
pursuing, run it through your model, and rank them in a spreadsheet in order 
of most to least likely to convert. You provide the spreadsheet to your VP of 
sales. 
Next, you decide to highlight a couple of your most relevant results: 
15 

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
 
Age:​ We’re selling a lot more to prospects in their early 30s, rather than those 
in their mid-20s. This is unexpected since our product targets people in their 
mid-20s! 
Marketing methods: ​We use social media marketing to target people in their 
20s, but email campaigns to people in their 30s. This appears to be a 
significant factor behind the difference in conversion rates. 
The following week, you meet with the VP of sales and walk her through your 
conclusions. She’s thrilled with your work and ready to act on your 
proposals.  
Boom! You’ve had a real impact on your company’s revenue! 
 
 
 
16 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
 
Data Scientists in Action 
We have a large community of mentors and alumni at Springboard who have 
shared stories about what a day in the life of a data scientist is like. They’re 
all practitioners in the field with real-life experience. Understanding what they 
do is a helpful step in fully understanding data science. 
 
From Polyurethanes to Python 
 
After graduating with a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering, ​Melanie 
Hanna​ worked in a variety of manufacturing settings, including a 
polyurethane plant. But lacing up steel-toed boots every morning was not the 
life for her. 
When given the opportunity to work for a large pharmaceutical company in 
their pilot plant—an offer most chemical engineers would jump at—Melanie 
realized she had zero excitement to do the job and decided she needed to 
pivot. 
Drawn toward analytical thinking, Melanie ultimately decided that she 
wanted to pursue data science. Studying chemical engineering in school 
gave her a base in data science concepts, but Melanie knew she needed 
further education, so she enrolled in a Springboard course.   
17 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 
 
In her new role, Melanie works on “productionalizing” models and turning 
model results into repeatable calculations that can be used throughout the 
company. She spends most of her day programming, meeting with business 
stakeholders, and working with data engineers and developers to ensure an 
error-free pipeline of data and transformations. 
 
An Even Split 
In his role as a data scientist at Mozilla, ​Ryan Harter​’s typical day is split 
pretty evenly between analysis, meetings, and review.  
He describes it this way: 
Analysis is me actually doing computation, writing queries, trying to gauge 
something about the universe that isn't understood right now. 
 
Meetings and scoping analyses—these are understanding the problem and 
communicating my results out. I spend a lot of time in meetings trying to draw 
value from the analyses that I've done.  
And then separately I spend a lot of time reviewing and answering questions 
for other folks. This can be something as simple as writing a quick query for a 
question that doesn't need a lot of work or reviewing some more junior 
analyst's analysis or maybe even some PM's analysis.  
 
This mix changes with seniority. More senior data scientists do a lot of 
reviews, mid-level professionals spend a significant amount of time meeting, 
communicating insights, and making sure the processes work. Junior 
members of the team tend to focus on analysis, Ryan said. 
18 

--- PAGE 20 ---
 
 
The Sky’s the Limit 
 
From a young age, ​Karen Masterson​ loved learning about language. As she 
got older, she started making the connection between programming 
languages and ancient languages, and began to see parallels between 
programming languages and natural ones. 
Karen was updating her Ph.D. dissertation on an information theoretic 
approach to languages when she realized her once-theoretical topic was 
now at the cutting edge of today’s technology in natural language 
processing and artificial intelligence. That helped her make the decision to 
go back to work full-time in tech after raising her kids. 
“I feel like the sky’s the limit with data science,” she said. “I especially like 
natural language processing and what can be done with it as far as language 
translation and artificial intelligence.” 
In her new role as a data analyst for Verizon Digital Media Services, Karen 
spends her days solving problems using a practical application of language 
processing, and tools like SQL and Hadoop.  
 
19 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 
 
What You Need to Learn to Become a Data Scientist  
Data scientists are expected to know a lot and to possess a diverse skill set, 
from statistics to communication, coding to machine learning algorithms. 
They also come from various backgrounds. And there isn’t any one specific 
academic credential that data scientists are required to have. 
All the skills and tools we discuss are things you can teach yourself or learn 
with a ​Springboard mentor​. We’ve also laid out some resources to get you 
started down that path. 
 
Data Science Skills 
Analytical Mindset 
You’ll need an overall analytical mindset to do well in data science. A lot of 
data science involves solving problems. You’ll have to be adept at framing 
those problems and methodically applying logic to solve them.  
 
Mathematics 
When data gets large, it often gets unwieldy. You’ll need to use mathematics 
to process and structure the data you’re dealing with. Exactly how much and 
what kind depends on the specifics of your role. But it’s safe to say the 
typical data scientist will have familiarity with statistics, linear algebra, and 
calculus. 
 
20 

--- PAGE 22 ---
 
 
Statistics 
You need to know statistics to play with data. Statistics allows you to slice 
and dice through data, extracting the insights you need to make reasonable 
conclusions. You must know statistics to infer insights from smaller data 
sets onto larger populations. This is the fundamental law of data science.  
 
Data Analysis 
The process of turning numbers into insights is what it’s all about. In the 
business world, a data analyst will focus on exploring large sets of data and 
connecting that data with actions that can drive business impact.  
 
Data Visualization 
Finishing your data analysis is only half the battle. To drive impact, you will 
have to convince others to believe and adopt your insights. ​Human beings 
are visual creatures​. It’s typically much easier for us to process information 
by examining a (thoughtfully created) chart or graph than by poring over a 
spreadsheet.  
 
Algorithms  
Put simply, an algorithm is a well-defined set of steps to solve a specific 
problem. Data scientists use algorithms to make computers follow a certain 
set of rules or patterns. Understanding how to use machines to do your work 
21 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 
 
is essential to processing and analyzing data sets too large for the human 
mind to process.  
 
Machine Learning 
Machine learning is the set of algorithms used to make predictions based on 
a set of known information. Machine learning is what allows for Amazon to 
recommend you products based on your purchase history without any direct 
human intervention. It is a group of algorithms that will use machine power 
to unearth insights for you. In order to deal with massive data sets you’ll 
need to use machines to extend your thinking. 
 
Deep Learning 
Deep learning typically refers to the set of machine learning algorithms that 
extends a basic ​neural network​ to much higher levels of complexity, making 
them capable of learning on much larger data sets and performing many 
more operations than standard models. The data usually gets this large in 
image processing and signal processing. 
 
Natural Language Processing 
Natural language processing (NLP) uses techniques from computer science, 
linguistics, and machine learning to process human language, typically in the 
form of unstructured text. Common applications of NLP include: text 
classification (e.g., is this news article fake or real?), sentiment analysis (e.g., 
22 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
 
how much do customers like my product?) and topic modeling (e.g., what 
are some common themes people are talking about?).  
 
Business Acumen  
Data means little without its context. Most companies depend on their data 
scientists not just to mine data sets, but also to communicate their results to 
various stakeholders and present recommendations that can be acted upon.  
Communication is an underrated skill that can make or break a project. 
The best data scientists not only have the ability to work with large, complex 
data sets, but also understand intricacies of the business or organization 
they work for. 
Having general business knowledge allows them to ask the right questions, 
and come up with insightful solutions and recommendations that are 
actually feasible given any constraints that the business might impose. 
 
Domain Expertise 
As a data scientist, you should have deep knowledge of the company you 
work for and also understand the larger industry within which it operates for 
your insights to make sense. Data from a biology study can have a 
drastically different context than data gleaned from a well-designed 
psychology study. You should know enough to cut through industry jargon.  
 
23 

--- PAGE 25 ---
 
 
Data Science Tools 
With your skill set developed, you’ll now need to learn how to use modern 
data science tools. Each tool has its strengths and weaknesses, and each 
plays a different role in the data science process. You can use just one of 
them, or you can use all of them. What follows is a broad overview of the 
most popular tools in data science as well as the resources you’ll need to 
learn them properly if you want to dive deeper.  
 
File Formats 
Data can be stored in different file formats. Here are some of the most 
common: 
 
CSV 
Comma separated values. You’ve likely opened this sort of file with Excel 
before. CSVs use a delimiter (a piece of punctuation) to separate out 
different data points. 
 
SQL 
Structured Query Language is a programming language that works well for 
editing and querying information stored in a relational database. SQL can 
also be used for advanced analytical operations and for transforming the 
queried database’s structure. You can add or delete tables of data, for 
24 

--- PAGE 26 ---
 
 
example. There are open-source framework implementations of SQL, 
including the most popular one: MySQL.  
 
JSON 
JavaScript Object Notation is a lightweight data exchange format that can 
be read by both humans and machines.  
 
Excel 
Introduction to Excel 
Excel is often the gateway to data science, and something that every data 
scientist can benefit from learning. It allows you to easily manipulate data 
with what is essentially a What You See Is What You Get editor that lets you 
perform equations on data without working in code at all. It is a handy tool 
for data analysts who want to get results without programming. 
 
Benefits of Excel 
Excel is easy to get started with, and it’s a program that anybody who is in 
analytics will intuitively grasp. It can be very useful to communicate data to 
people who may not have any programming skills: they should still be able to 
play with the data. 
 
 
25 

--- PAGE 27 ---
 
 
Who Uses This 
Data analysts tend to use Excel. 
 
Level of Difficulty 
Beginner. 
 
Sample Project 
Importing a small data set on the statistics of professional basketball 
players and making a simple graph of the top scorers in the league. 
 
SQL 
Introduction to SQL 
Data science needs data. SQL is a programming language specially 
designed to extract data from databases. 
 
Benefits of SQL 
SQL remains one of the ​most popular tools used by data scientists​. Most 
data in the world is stored in tables that will require SQL to access. You’ll be 
able to filter and sort through the data with it. 
 
 
26 

--- PAGE 28 ---
 
 
Who Uses This 
Data analysts and some data engineers tend to use SQL.  
 
Level of Difficulty 
Beginner. 
 
Sample Project 
Using a SQL query to select the top 10 most popular songs from a SQL 
database of the Billboard 100 music chart.  
 
Python 
Introduction to Python 
Once you download ​Anaconda​, an environment manager for Python, and get 
set up on ​Jupyter Notebook​, you’ll quickly realize how intuitive it is. A 
versatile programming language designed for everything from building 
websites to gathering data from across the web, Python has many code 
libraries dedicated to making data science work easier. 
 
Benefits of Python 
Python is a versatile programming language with a simple syntax that is 
easy to learn.  
27 

--- PAGE 29 ---
 
 
The average salary for jobs with Python in their description is around 
$102,000​. Python is one of the ​fastest-growing programming languages​ in 
the world. The Python community is passionate about teaching Python and 
building useful tools that will save you time and allow you to do more with 
your data. 
Many data scientists use Python to solve their problems: 63 percent of 
respondents to the annual ​data science survey​ conducted by O’Reilly used 
Python, an increase from 58 percent the previous year. 
 
Who Uses This 
Data engineers and data scientists use Python for medium-sized data sets. 
 
Level of Difficulty 
Intermediate. 
 
Sample Project 
Using Python to source tweets from celebrities, then doing an analysis of the 
most frequently used words by applying programming rules. 
 
 
 
28 

--- PAGE 30 ---
 
 
R 
Introduction to R 
R is a staple in the data science community because it is designed explicitly 
for data analysis. R shines when it comes to building statistical models and 
displaying the results. 
 
Benefits of R 
R has fallen slightly behind Python in popularity among data scientists in 
recent years, but it remains an important tool. It is an environment where a 
wide variety of statistical and graphing techniques can be applied. 
The community contributes packages that, similar to Python, can extend the 
core functions of the R codebase so that it can be applied to very specific 
problems, such as measuring financial metrics or analyzing climate data. 
 
Who Uses This 
Data engineers and data scientists will use R for medium-sized data sets. 
 
Level of Difficulty 
Intermediate. 
 
Sample Project 
29 

--- PAGE 31 ---
 
 
Using R to graph stock market movements over the last five years. 
 
Big Data Tools 
Big data comes from ​Moore’s Law​, a theory that computing power doubles 
every two years. This has led to the rise of massive data sets generated by 
millions of computers.  
Put simply, big data is a collective term that describes data that is too large 
to fit on a single computer. Conventional tools like SQL and Excel are 
typically unable to handle big data, so new ones have been developed to take 
their place. 
Here are tools that help solve that problem: 
 
Hadoop 
Introduction to Hadoop 
Hadoop ​MapReduce​ is a software framework that treats multiple computers 
as if they were one, which enables a single set of commands to utilize the 
storage and processing power of as many computers as you want (or can 
afford to pay for). 
 
 
 
30 

--- PAGE 32 ---
 
 
Benefits of Hadoop 
Hadoop is an open-source ecosystem of tools that allow you to MapReduce 
your data and store enormous data sets on different servers. It allows you to 
manage much more data than you can on a single computer. 
 
Who Uses This 
Data engineers and data scientists will use Hadoop to handle big data sets. 
 
Level of Difficulty 
Advanced. 
 
Sample Project 
Using Hadoop to store massive data sets that update in real time, such as 
the number of likes Facebook users generate. 
 
NoSQL 
Introduction to NoSQL 
Tables that bring all their data with them can become cumbersome. NoSQL 
includes a host of data storage solutions that separate out huge data sets 
into manageable chunks.  
 
31 

--- PAGE 33 ---
 
 
Benefits of NoSQL 
NoSQL was a trend pioneered by Google to deal with the impossibly large 
amounts of data they were storing. Often structured in the JSON format 
popular with web developers, solutions like MongoDB have created 
databases that can be manipulated like SQL tables, but which can store the 
data with less structure and density. 
 
Who Uses This 
Data engineers and data scientists will use NoSQL for big data sets, often 
website databases for millions of users. 
 
Level of Difficulty 
Advanced. 
 
Sample Project 
Storing data on the users of a social media application that is deployed on 
the web.  
 
32 

--- PAGE 34 ---
 
 
Bringing Tools Into the Data Science Process 
Each one of the tools we’ve described is complementary. They each have 
their strengths and weaknesses, and each one can be applied to different 
stages in the data science process.  
 
Collect Data 
Sometimes it isn’t doing the data analysis that is hard, but rather finding the 
data you need. Thankfully, there are many resources. 
You can create data sets by extracting data from an API (application 
programming interface). These allow developers to programmatically 
interact with data. Twitter, Facebook, and Yelp are among the large tech 
companies with the most popular APIs. 
Springboard has compiled ​19 of our favorite public data sets​ on our blog. 
Python supports most data formats. You can play with CSVs or with JSON 
sourced from the web. You can import SQL tables directly into your code. 
You can also create data sets from the web. ​Python’s Requests library 
scrapes data from different websites with a line of code. You’ll be able to 
take data from Wikipedia tables, and once you’ve cleaned the data with the 
Beautiful Soup library​, you’ll be able to analyze them in-depth. 
R can ​take in data​ from Excel, CSVs, and text files. Files built in Minitab or in 
SPSS format can be turned into R data frames. 
33 

--- PAGE 35 ---
 
 
The ​Rvest​ package will allow you to perform basic web scraping, while 
magrittr​ will clean and parse the information for you. These packages are 
similar to the Requests and Beautiful Soup libraries in Python. 
 
Process Data 
Excel allows you to easily clean data with menu functions that can remove 
duplicate values, filter and sort columns, and delete rows or columns of data. 
SQL has basic filtering and sorting functions so you can source exactly the 
data you need. You can also update SQL tables and clean certain values 
from them.  
Python uses the ​pandas​ library for data analysis. It is much quicker to 
process larger data sets than Excel, and it has more functionality. 
You can clean data by applying programmatic methods to the data with 
pandas. You can, for example, replace every error value in the data set with a 
default value, such as zero, in one line of code. 
R can help you add columns of information, reshape, and transform the data 
itself. Many of the newer R libraries allow you to play with different data 
frames and make them fit the criteria you’ve set. 
NoSQL allows you to subset large data sets and to change data at will, which 
you can use to clean through your data.  
 
 
 
34 

--- PAGE 36 ---
 
 
Explore Data 
Excel can add columns together, get the averages, and do basic statistical 
and numerical analysis with pre-built functions. 
Python and pandas can take complex rules and apply them to data so you 
can easily spot high-level trends. 
You’ll be able to do deep ​time series analysis​ in pandas. You could track 
variations in stock prices to their finest detail, for example. 
R was built to do statistical and numerical analysis of large data sets. You’ll 
be able to build probability distributions, apply a variety of statistical tests to 
your data, and use standard machine learning and data mining techniques. 
NoSQL and Hadoop both allow you to explore data on a similar level to SQL. 
 
Analyze Data 
Excel can analyze data at an advanced level. Use pivot tables that display 
your data dynamically, advanced formulas, or macro scripts that allow you 
to programmatically go through your data. 
Python has a numeric analysis library: NumPy. You can do scientific 
computing and calculation with SciPy. You can access a lot of pre-built 
machine learning algorithms with the scikit-learn code library. 
R has plenty of packages out there for specific analyses, such as the 
Poisson distribution​ and mixtures of probability laws.  
 
35 

--- PAGE 37 ---
 
 
Communicate Data 
Excel has basic chart and plotting functionality. You can easily build 
dashboards and dynamic charts that will update as soon as somebody 
changes the underlying data. 
Python has a lot of powerful options to visualize data. You can use the 
Matplotlib​ library to generate basic graphs and charts from the data 
embedded in your Python. If you want something that’s a bit more advanced, 
you could try Plot.ly and its ​Python API​. 
You can also use the nbconvert function to turn your Python notebooks into 
websites or your online portfolio. Many people have used this function to 
create ​online tutorials​ on how to learn Python.  
R was built to do statistical analysis and demonstrate the results. It’s a 
powerful environment suited to scientific visualization with many packages 
that specialize in graphical display of results. The base graphics module 
allows you to make all of the basic charts and plots you’d like from data 
matrices. You can then save these files into image formats or you can save 
them as separate PDFs. You can use ​ggplot2​ for more advanced plots such 
as complex scatter plots with regression lines. 
 
Python vs. R 
These languages are always in competition to be the language of choice 
among data scientists. 
Python is versatile, simple, easier to learn, and powerful because of its 
usefulness in a variety of contexts, some of which have nothing to do with 
36 

--- PAGE 38 ---
 
 
data science. R is a specialized environment that looks to optimize for data 
analysis, but which is harder to learn.  
While the Python vs. R debate is often framed as a zero-sum game, in reality 
it’s not. Learning both tools and using them for their respective strengths 
can only help you improve as a data scientist. Twelve percent of data 
scientists polled by KDnuggets in 2017 used both R and Python.  
O’Reilly found in their survey of data scientists that using many 
programming tools is correlated with increased salary. While those who 
work in Python may be paid more than those who work in R ($100,000 to 
$90,000, according to the most recent data), those who used 15 or more 
tools made $30,000 more than those who used 10 to 14. 
The Python vs. R debate really doesn’t need to happen unless you really want 
to confine yourself to one programming language. The reality is that as a 
data scientist, you’ll often be called upon to do different tasks, and you’ll only 
be able to do them better if you know exactly which tool is best.  
 
We recently asked two working data scientists for their thoughts on this 
debate. 
Springboard mentor and Mozilla data scientist Ryan Harter: 
“Python, I think, is more general purpose. I characterize this by saying that 
Python is maintained by computer scientists and R is maintained by 
statisticians. Python can be more general purpose, better if you need to do 
some scraping or something general like that. But R is great for running 
statistical analyses. There are a lot of things built in that haven’t caught up in 
the Python world. If you’re trying to build things like visualizations or you’re 
37 

--- PAGE 39 ---
 
 
trying to make very quick progress as a data scientist, R can be a very useful 
tool.” 
 
Mansha Mahtani, a data scientist at Instagram: 
“R and Python are very different languages, but I wouldn't say that there's 
one that's better than the other. It really depends on preference and what 
you're trying to do. So, if you have had more object-oriented programming 
experience, you probably are going to hate R. But if you are someone who 
likes doing ad hoc analysis, if you want to just keep checking your code in 
the middle or coming up with quick visualizations, R might be the right place 
for you. I wouldn't get too married to choosing a specific language. I would 
say just go with what you're comfortable with. What's great is both 
languages are trying to compete with each other to be the preference for 
data scientists, so they're kind of evolving to do the same things.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 

--- PAGE 40 ---
 
 
Starting Your Job Search 
 
How to Build a Data Science Portfolio and Resume 
No matter the field, it’s important to make a great first impression. But this is 
particularly important when you’re transitioning into a new career. It all starts 
with your portfolio and your resume.  
Many data scientists have their own websites, which serve as both a 
repository of their work and a blog. This allows them to demonstrate their 
experience and the value they create in the data science community.  
In order for your portfolio to have the same effect, it must share the 
following traits: 
1. Your portfolio should highlight your best projects. Focusing on a few 
memorable projects is generally better than showing a large number of 
them. 
2. It must be well-designed and tell a captivating story of who you are 
beyond your work. 
3. You should build value for your visitors by highlighting any impact 
you’ve had through your work. Maybe you built a tool that’s useful for a 
general audience? Perhaps you have a tutorial? Showcase them here. 
4. It should be easy to find your contact information. 
Data scientist, instructor, and Springboard mentor David Yakobovitch 
recently shared his thoughts on what makes a ​data science portfolio​ stand 
out: 
 
39 

--- PAGE 41 ---
 
 
What should be included in a data science portfolio? 
If a recruiter or someone who wants to hire you is going to look at your link, 
it’s important that what you share be able to stand alone without you. 
In a competitive job market, it’s important that if you send the link, someone 
could look at it and understand the business case, they can read the whole 
problem. So I think the one area that often people can add more to is that 
business case, writing up those paragraphs. 
In data science, you can write that in Markdown. After every single line of 
code, write a thoughtful interpretation: what’s occurring here, what’s the 
meaning of the analysis, how does it relate to your client or customer? 
 
How many projects should be in a data science portfolio? 
For the ​Data Science Career Track​, we have two capstones that students 
work on, so I like to say a minimum of two projects in your portfolio. Often 
when I work with students and they’ve finished the capstones and they’re 
starting the job search, I say, “Why not start a third project?” That could be 
using data sets on popular sites such as ​Kaggle​ or using a passion project 
you’re interested in or partnering with a non-profit. 
When you’re doing these interviews, you want to have multiple projects you 
can talk about. If you’re just talking about one project for a 30-to-60-minute 
interview, it doesn’t give you enough material. So that’s why it’s great to have 
two or three, because you could talk about the whole workflow—and ideally, 
these projects work on different components of data science. 
 
40 

--- PAGE 42 ---
 
 
What’s the best order? 
The order really depends on what message you’d like to convey and the 
strength of what you’ve accomplished. I believe that you should show your 
projects in order of complexity. So if you have three capstones, the one that 
has the more advanced machine learning or the bigger scale you could show 
first, and then the others could follow. 
If you’re going to show your projects on LinkedIn or on your resume, you 
don’t need to show many paragraphs. You could put one to two sentences 
and the link: “This is the supervised machine learning model on credit default 
risk and here’s the GitHub link.” It could be that simple. 
 
What’s the optimal format? 
I think GitHub is the best resource to showcase this. You can set up your 
own repositories, where it has full support from Markdown, which lets you 
format your reports. And you can also have all your code—your Jupyter 
notebooks, your R files—they could all be shared there. 
In addition, as part of the portfolio, it’s not only important to show the code 
and to show the Markdown files, but if you can make a business case for it 
presentable to an audience, that’s really helpful. 
Two things I encourage all students to do: the first is to create a PowerPoint. 
You have 10 to 20 slides that summarize it, so anyone can look at that 
PowerPoint or PDF and see what you’ve accomplished and the business 
case surrounding that project. 
41 

--- PAGE 43 ---
 
 
And secondly, going the extra mile is creating a YouTube video of you doing 
the presentation. You can keep it as an unlisted video and if a recruiter ever 
says, “Hey, I want to see an example of your portfolio or a project you’ve 
done,” not only can you point them to GitHub, but you can also show them 
your personality and your presentation skills by sharing that YouTube link. 
 
How to Network and Build a Personal Brand in Data Science 
Once you have learned the required skills and developed a strong portfolio, 
the next step is to connect with people who can help you leverage those 
strengths into a data science job. 
Building your network among data scientists will substantially increase your 
odds of breaking into the field. Many of the best opportunities aren’t posted 
on job boards.  
 
Find a Mentor 
One of the highest-value networking activities you can pursue is finding a 
mentor who can guide you as you seek and pursue a data science career. 
Somebody who has been in a hiring position can tell you exactly what 
companies are looking for and how to prepare for interviews. She can also 
introduce you to other people in the data science community, or in the best 
of cases, even end up hiring you! 
What some people don’t understand is that mentorship is a two-way street, 
and you can always create value for your mentor in different ways, whether 
it’s sharing your story, or giving them some perspective on problems they 
42 

--- PAGE 44 ---
 
 
see. Mentorship is a special category of a relationship where you can build 
value for yourself in a professional context—but never forget the golden rule 
of relationships: you get what you give. 
We’ve seen the benefits of mentorship first-hand at Springboard. In all of our 
courses, students are paired with a mentor from the industry they hope to 
break into, which leads to significantly better outcomes through increased 
accountability and motivation.  
 
Go to Conferences 
At some of these events, you will get to hear from and build connections 
with established data scientists, and even unearth hidden job opportunities. 
With a bit of searching, you can find great data science events in your area.  
Here are a few to consider: 
The Strata Data Conference​, created in 2012, is the largest data 
conference series in the world. Speakers come from academia and 
private industry. The themes tend to be oriented around cutting-edge 
data science trends in action. Practical workshops are provided if you 
want to learn the technology behind data science, and there are plenty 
of networking events.  
KDD​ (Knowledge Discovery in Data Mining) is a large interdisciplinary 
conference bringing together researchers and practitioners from data 
science, data mining, knowledge discovery, large-scale data analytics, 
and big data. It’s also an organization that seeks to lead discussion 
and teaching of the science behind data science. Membership and 
43 

--- PAGE 45 ---
 
 
attendance at these conferences offers an awesome way to contribute 
to growing trends in data science.  
NeurIPS​, or Neural Information Processing Systems (previously known 
as NIPS), is a largely academic data science conference focused on 
evaluating cutting-edge science papers in the field. Attending will give 
you a sneak preview of what will shape data science in the future.  
The International Conference on Machine Learning​ (ICML) is 
supported by the International Machine Learning Society and brings 
together some of the best minds in machine learning to present 
research and discuss new ideas. It was first held in 1980. 
 
Attend Meetups 
We’ve listed the major conferences where the data science community 
assembles, but there are many smaller meetups that serve to connect the 
local data science community.  
The San Francisco Bay Area tends to have the most data meetups, though 
there is usually one in every major city in the U.S. You can look up data 
science meetups near you with ​Meetup.com​. Some of the largest data 
science meetups, with more than 4,000 members, are ​SF Data Mining​, ​Data 
Science DC​, ​Data Science London​, and the ​Bay Area R User Group​. 
Most data science meetups are organized by influencers in the local data 
science community. If you really want to make a splash, you should consider 
volunteering at a data science event. 
Most events follow the same format, with an invited speaker who gives a 
talk and then a networking period where everybody connects with each 
44 

--- PAGE 46 ---
 
 
other. The general data science meetups will often have an industry talk 
where somebody will delve into a real-world data science problem and how it 
was solved. Specialized data science meetups, such as Python or R groups, 
will often focus on technical tutorials that teach a specific tool or skill.  
You should introduce yourself to the local data science community! You may 
just walk away with a career opportunity. 
 
Other Ways to Network 
We live in a digital world, so you shouldn’t feel confined to offline networking! 
Some of the best data scientists are on Twitter, and you can discover 
influencers worth following (and potentially connecting with) through 
podcasts and other outlets. 
Talking Machines​ includes interviews with prominent data scientists. 
Partially Derivative​ has been described as “‘Car Talk’ for the data 
community.” The ​O’Reilly Data Show​ is the equivalent of a graduate seminar 
delivered in podcast form. 
You’ll also find online blogs, newsletters, and communities such as ​O’Reilly 
and KDnuggets that will help you connect with data scientists online. 
Make sure to check out ​Reddit​ and ​Quora​, where you can engage in trending 
data science discussions, and you’ll always find a lot of great programming 
resources and related content on ​Hacker News​. 
 
Job Boards 
1. ​Kaggle​ offers a job board for data scientists. 
45 

--- PAGE 47 ---
 
 
2. You can find a list of open data scientist jobs at ​Indeed​ and ​Glassdoor​. 
3. ​Datajobs​ is a listings site for data science. 
4. ​Data Science Central​ has a frequently updated jobs section. 
As previously mentioned, you can also find job opportunities through 
networking and through finding a mentor. We continue to emphasize that 
the best job positions are often found by talking to people within the data 
science community. 
You’ll also be able to find opportunities for employment in startup forums. 
Hacker News has a ​job board​ that is exclusive to Y Combinator startups. Y 
Combinator is arguably the most prestigious startup accelerator in the 
world. ​AngelList​ is a database for startups looking to get funding and it also 
has a robust jobs section.  
 
Ace the Data Science Interview 
An entire book could be written on the data science interview—in fact, ​we 
have one of those​! But here’s a condensed guide to help prepare you to nail 
the various parts of the interview process. 
 
The Phone Screen 
Your point of entry typically will be the human resources department. 
Sometimes there will be basic technical questions to screen out unqualified 
candidates, but most of the time, this screen involves establishing the 
beginnings of a culture fit and making sure that you have the 
46 

--- PAGE 48 ---
 
 
communication skills to come off well in a subsequent interview with the 
hiring manager.  
Many candidates underestimate this process because it's not technical and 
it's with a recruiter. But if you don't do well here, you won't go to the next 
stage. So come prepared with thoughtful, practiced responses to some of 
the typical questions: 
 
1. Why do you want to be a data scientist/analyst? 
a. The best kind of answer is one that shows you’re connecting 
dots from your past such that data science is the obvious next 
step. Maybe you were a political science major and economics 
minor who had an internship in government and found you loved 
working with large data sets. It’s clear, then, that data science is 
the immediate next step.  
2. Why do you want to work at this company? 
a. Mission alignment is important. You might be looking at jobs 
across many industries, but you’ll come out on top here if you 
can tie your decision-making to the company’s current problems.  
b. Show that you’ve done your research; point to the team size and 
stage, recent press you’ve read, positive impressions from 
Glassdoor or Muse profiles, etc.  
c. Try to show genuine motivation—not just “I need a job,” but “I 
need this job.” 
47 

--- PAGE 49 ---
 
 
3. Talk about a time you had to handle a conflict with your colleagues or 
manager. 
a. They’re looking for smarts, good communication skills, 
problem-solving ability, an absence of ego, and above all else, 
self-awareness and introspection. 
b. Read between the lines: tell them not just the situation and what 
you did to resolve it, but also what you learned from it for the 
future.  
c. Making yourself look good at others’ expense actually doesn’t 
reflect well on you! Speak positively about past coworkers and 
companies.  
Remember not to treat the person talking to you on the phone as "just a 
recruiter." Maintain full professional courtesy with everyone in the interview 
process, no matter what their role in the organization. 
Finally, during this call you’ll want to get a sense of what problems the data 
team is facing and the organizational structure of the team you’d be joining. 
This will help you later in the process. 
 
The Take-Home Assignment 
After the phone screen, companies often send a prepared assignment to 
candidates, with some time pressure applied to screen out people who may 
be technically weak or who may not be committed to the recruitment 
process. 
Common example assignments include: 
48 

--- PAGE 50 ---
 
 
- A deep analysis on a specific data set provided for you. Here, you’d be 
expected to storytell around insights found in the data.  
- Cleaning a data set with significant errors. 
- Working with a specific problem relevant to the business (e.g., 
building a job recommendation system for applicants based on data 
from job descriptions). 
Take the time needed to do the assignment well, and try to see how it relates 
to problems the company is solving. Don't just answer the technical 
question. Focus on the story and providing concrete recommendations 
based on your answers. It's better to provide a simple analysis with practical 
business recommendations than a complex technical analysis with no real 
business implications.  
 
The Call With the Hiring Manager 
This will likely be the final evaluation before a company invites you to an 
on​-site interview. The call typically is split into three components: 
 
Mathematics/statistics - You’ll be evaluated on core concepts here, but the 
specifics will depend on the role and company. Web companies may focus 
on p​-values and statistical significance. Energy companies might test you on 
regression and linear algebra. No matter what type of interviewer you’re 
talking with, sketch out your thought process. Treat the question like a 
mathematical proof and a test of your ability to reason, but also try to tell a 
coherent story about why this matters to the company.  
49 

--- PAGE 51 ---
 
 
Coding - You’ll be evaluated on your ability to solve coding challenges by 
presenting pseudo code or compile-ready code. If you’re applying for a data 
analyst position, this will swing more toward how you’d think about querying 
data with SQL. Otherwise, you’ll be asked questions in the programming and 
scripting languages you’ve claimed experience in, from Java to Python. You 
will likely be asked about data structures more than anything else. Know 
hashmaps, trees, stacks, and queues very well.  
Note:​ Your interviewer may also use tools like HackerRank or 
Collabedit to evaluate you live. In this case, your hiring manager will 
watch you as you type out your solution. Train with those tools if you 
can! 
Communication/culture - The hiring manager will try to get a feel for your 
character, your motivation, and your fit with their team. Most hiring 
managers have a mental model for who they are looking for. The closer you 
fit to it, the more likely you’ll pass to on-site interviews. This is where your 
work with the recruiter will shine. The more you know about the problems 
the hiring manager is facing and the kind of person they’re looking for, the 
better you’ll be able to present yourself as a fit.  
Tip:​ Networking in advance with people who work or have worked for 
the company will give you an idea what the culture is like. 
 
On-Site Interview - With the Hiring Manager 
Finally meeting face to face, the hiring manager will be evaluating you from 
both a technical and non​technical perspective. They’re looking to ascertain if 
50 

--- PAGE 52 ---
 
 
you’re a culture fit, and they may test you on your technical chops by having 
you whiteboard different scenarios.  
In general, hiring managers appreciate when you demonstrate: 
1. Passion for the company and data science in general 
2. An ability to get along well with everybody, which may even help you 
balance weaknesses in your technical ability 
3. Strong willingness to learn and demonstrated ability to do so rapidly 
4. A strong record of previous projects and the ability to relate them with 
impact driven 
5. Strong analytical ability 
 
On-Site Interview - Technical Challenge 
Prepare to be challenged on your technical skills in one form or another, 
especially for roles that lean more toward data engineering. You’ll often find 
that this is similar to a software engineering interview, where you will be 
asked to whiteboard and write down how you’d implement certain 
algorithms or solve problems. 
This is where strong knowledge of software engineering concepts, such as 
time complexity or Big O notation, and a strong grasp of the mathematics 
and statistics behind data algorithms can truly shine. 
 
 
51 

--- PAGE 53 ---
 
 
On-Site Interview - With an Executive 
If you pass the bar for your hiring manager, you’ll likely have a final interview 
with a senior executive. In a startup, this will often be the ​founder. Normally, 
only candidates who have passed the technical assessment will get here, so 
now you need to emphasize how you can drive impact with your knowledge 
of the business itself and the problems it faces.  
Tips:  
1. Dress accordingly. A great rule is to dress one notch higher than the 
employees normally do. 
2. Research your interviewer and the company. Come up with relevant 
questions to ask. The importance of this cannot be overstated. Here are 
some examples: 
●What does success look like for this position?  
●Which projects do you have in mind for this role? 
●What is the last project you shipped? How long did it take? What were 
the stumbling blocks? 
●What will my first 90 days in this role look like? 
●Why did the last person who quit this team or company leave? 
●What is the current state of the data infrastructure? 
●What's the riskiest/most audacious project the team has taken on in 
the past year, and what was the result? 
52 

--- PAGE 54 ---
 
 
●If you had unlimited headcount, how many people would you hire, and 
what roles would you hire them for? 
●How are tasks prioritized? When was the last time you had to 
circumvent that process?  
3. Keep answers detailed but concise. The interviewer can lose interest if 
your answers are long-winded and unfocused. 
4. Smile and be confident. Don’t come in stressed. Meditate, stretch, or 
read​—do whatever it takes to get you to your peak. 
We’ve put together an exhaustive list of 109 ​data science interview 
questions​ that will help prepare you for these on-site meetings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 

--- PAGE 55 ---
 
 
Paths Into Data Science 
 
For people interested in becoming data scientists, few things are as 
interesting or inspiring as the stories of other people who made the 
transition.  
What background do they come from? What skills did they have to pick up? 
Who are these folks and how can you become one of them them? 
Fortunately, at Springboard we have a long list of mentors and alumni who 
can tell you about their journey into data science and help you with yours. 
Here are some of their stories. 
 
Turning Frustration Into Success 
 
As an analyst for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, ​Aaron 
Pujanandez​ focused on market power studies of the U.S. electric industry. 
He worked with data, but on the level of making recommendations on future 
events based on assumptions that they would match historical trends. For 
Aaron, that wasn’t satisfying. 
Aaron’s interest in more advanced data science topics grew from his 
frustration with the limitations of the data tools that were available to him. 
54 

--- PAGE 56 ---
 
 
He decided to explore new techniques so he could develop better answers to 
the questions he was struggling with. 
Armed with the skills he learned through Springboard’s course, Aaron 
created a brand new position for himself at the Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission and then moved on to Accenture Federal Services, where he’s 
an analytics and modeling manager. 
“In my new position, I’m able to use my data science skills to help 
government agencies derive insights from their data to drive business 
decisions,” ​he said​. “As a manager, I’m able to work more as a mentor and 
advisor for junior data scientists just starting their career.” 
Aaron’s background shows that if you find yourself limited, you can create a 
path toward professional satisfaction. 
 
Escaping Academia for Startup Life 
Meghan Thomason​ has a Ph.D. in ecology from the University of California, 
Davis. During her academic career, she focused on invaded plant 
communities, trying to understand why non-native plants were successful, 
often from a perspective of studying their competitive interactions with 
resident species. She studied grasslands, rangelands, chaparral, and riverine 
wetlands and brackish marshes all over Northern California. Over the course 
of her studies, she learned increasingly complex statistical techniques, 
leading her to consider data science as a career.  
"Although I enjoyed research, it became clear the job market was severely 
oversaturated, and I began researching other opportunities for someone with 
quantitative and programming skills," ​said Meghan​, who began working for a 
55 

--- PAGE 57 ---
 
 
digital publishing startup shortly after completing Springboard’s Data 
Science Career Track. 
Meghan’s background proves that you can unearth insights from many 
different fields in data science.   
 
Hooked by a Book 
 
Srdjan Santic​ had a solid foundation from which to begin building a full 
career in data science. He holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees in 
economics and quickly found work as a statistician, spending six years at a 
large marketing research consultancy. There, he cut his teeth on analytics, 
statistical inference, and predictive modeling. 
He connects his full transition to a book he often used at work that relied on 
the commercial software SPSS for its hands-on examples. One day, he 
noticed that the same authors (Andy Field and Jeremy Miles) had released a 
new edition​ using the statistical programming language R for examples. 
“It intrigued me, I ordered it, and after the first few chapters, and only a few 
exercises of writing code to accomplish a task, I was instantly hooked,” 
Srdjan said​. “I continued to work through the book and learn R, also did some 
online courses on R and Python, and decided that this was the toolset I want 
to keep using in my career.” 
56 

--- PAGE 58 ---
 
 
He remembers the exact day in the summer of 2013 when he made the 
decision: “I suddenly thought to myself, ‘I think I’m more than ready to get a 
full-time job using just these tools.’” 
A week later, he landed a part-time gig; six months later, he started his first 
full-time data science job. 
Srdjan’s story shows that listening to your gut can pay off. 
 
The Intersection of Art and Science 
 
James Flint​ ​describes himself​ as “a kid from Stratford-upon-Avon, England, 
who grew up wanting to be a writer but kept getting distracted by 
computers.” After his science- and tech-inflected studies, he began writing 
for the U.K.’s first newspaper technology supplement at The Independent, 
helped launch the country’s first dedicated art and tech magazine, Mute, and 
worked for Wired magazine before becoming head of digital development at 
The Telegraph.  
Firmly planted in the intersection of art and science, James took a leap into 
the startup world, eventually co-founding an online community platform 
designed for health teams and patients.  
“What I have come to realize over the years, and what is so wonderfully 
refreshing (and reassuringly human) about the current AI inflection in the 
57 

--- PAGE 59 ---
 
 
evolution of computation,” he says, “is that data science and machine 
learning require statistics and storytelling, deduction and induction, coding 
and writing.” 
James’ experience proves that there’s an art to data science. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 

--- PAGE 60 ---
 
 
Conclusion  
 
Getting your first data science job might be challenging, but it’s an 
achievable goal. It takes a diligent approach to picking up skills, working on 
projects, building a portfolio, and getting your work (and yourself) in front of 
the right people. 
We hope that going through this guide has brought you a little bit closer to 
your goal of breaking into a career in data science.  
For additional support, check out our ​Data Science Career Track​, a 
mentor-guided, career-focused bootcamp designed to get students a job as 
a data scientist within six months of completing the course—or their tuition 
is refunded.  
If you thought this was valuable, share a free copy of this guide to your friends 
or coworkers on ​Facebook​, ​Twitter​, or ​Linkedin​. 
 
 
 
59 

--- PAGE 61 ---
 
 
Additional Resources 
 
Data Science Roles 
This ​article from Hacker Noon​, written by Google’s chief decision intelligence 
engineer, runs through the different data science roles from a unique 
perspective.  
This ​Springboard blog post​ also provides a deep dive into the different 
career paths. 
 
Skills and Tools 
This ​Quora post​ is a broad overview of many of the essential skills you need 
to become a data scientist, and resources to go about learning them. 
The following ​introduction to Python​ will get you set up on the basics. 
This ​blog​ will help you with all of the latest news in Excel data visualization. 
This interactive ​tutorial to R​ will help you grasp the fundamentals.  
W3Schools has an excellent ​interactive tutorial on SQL​ that will get you 
started on how to select parts of a database for further analysis. 
 
Getting Data 
This Springboard blog post lists many of your options for finding high-quality 
public data sets​.  
60 

--- PAGE 62 ---
 
 
Algorithms 
The 10 most influential data mining algorithms can be quite complex (and 
there are many others), but ​this blog post​ explains them in plain English.  
 
Machine Learning 
This ​repository on machine learning​ offers a solid definition and working 
examples you can get started on right away. If you’re more of a visual 
learner, this ​introduction​ to ML concepts will fill the gap for you. 
 
Data Visualization 
Flowing Data is a blog that focuses on data communication and the design 
of ​appealing data visualizations​. 
 
Data Science Interviews 
Here is a list of ​data science interview questions​ and how to prepare for 
them. 
 
Building a Data Science Portfolio 
Check out this webinar for ​data science portfolio​ guidance from a 
Springboard mentor. 
 
61 

--- PAGE 63 ---
 
 
Learn more about data science! 
 
Introduction to Data Science 
Build a foundation in R programming and statistics as you prepare for data 
analytics and junior data scientist roles. 
Enroll now 
 
Intermediate Data Science: Python 
Work on real-world projects to practice Python for data science; delve into 
machine learning and inferential statistics. 
Enroll now 
 
Data Science Career Track 
Get a complete education in data science along with personalized career 
coaching​—plus a ​job guarantee! 
Apply now 
62 

