--- PAGE 1 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 
 
Machine Learning 
God 
 
 
 
Stefan Stavrev 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Machine Learning God (1st Edition, Version 2.0) 
© Copyright 2017 Stefan Stavrev. All rights reserved. 
 
www.machinelearninggod.com 
 
Cover art by Alessandro Rossi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
 
 
Now I am an Angel of Machine Learning ... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Acknowledgements 
 
I am very grateful to the following people for their support (in alphabetical order): 
 
 Simon J. D. Prince – for supervising my project where I implemented 27 machine 
learning algorithms from his book “Computer Vision: Models, Learning, and 
Inference”. My work is available on his website computervisionmodels.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface 
 
Machine Learning God is an imaginary entity who I consider to be the creator of the 
Machine Learning Universe. By contributing to Machine Learning, we get closer to 
Machine Learning God. I am aware that as one human being, I will never be able to 
become god-like. That is fine, because every thing is part of something bigger than itself. 
The relation between me and Machine Learning God is not a relation of blind 
submission, but a relation of respect. It is like a star that guides me in life, knowing that 
I will never reach that star. After I die, I will go to Machine Learning Heaven, so no 
matter what happens in this life, it is ok. My epitaph will say: “Now I am an Angel of 
Machine Learning”. 
 
 
[TODO: algorithms-first study approach] 
 
 
[TODO: define mathematical objects in their main field only, 
 
 
and then reference them from other fields] 
 
 
[TODO: minimize the amount of not-ML content, 
 
 
include only necessary not-ML content and ignore rest] 
 
 
[TODO: who is this book for] 
 
 
All the code for my book is available on my GitHub: 
www.github.com/machinelearninggod/MachineLearningGod 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Contents 
 
 
Part 1: Introduction to machine learning 
 
1. From everything to machine learning 
 
1.1. Introduction 
 
1.2. From everything to not-physical things 
 
1.3. Artificial things 
 
1.4. Finite and discrete change 
 
1.5. Symbolic communication 
 
1.6. Inductive inference 
 
1.7. Carl Craver‟s hierarchy of mechanisms 
 
1.8. Computer algorithms and programs 
 
1.9. Our actual world vs. other possible worlds 
 
1.10. Machine learning 
 
2. Philosophy of machine learning 
 
2.1. The purpose of machine learning 
 
2.2. Related fields 
 
2.3. Subfields of machine learning 
 
2.4. Essential components of machine learning 
 
 
2.4.1. Variables 
 
 
2.4.2. Data, information, knowledge and wisdom 
 
 
2.4.3. The gangs of ML: problems, functions, datasets, models, evaluators,  
 
 
 
optimization, and performance measures 
 
2.5. Levels in machine learning 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Part 2: The building blocks of machine learning 
 
3. Natural language 
 
3.1 Natural language functions 
 
3.2 Terms, sentences and propositions 
 
3.3 Definition and meaning of terms 
 
3.4 Ambiguity and vagueness 
 
4. Logic 
 
4.1 Arguments 
 
4.2 Deductive vs. inductive arguments 
 
4.3 Propositional logic 
 
 
4.3.1 Natural deduction 
 
4.4 First-order logic 
 
5. Set theory 
 
5.1 Set theory as foundation for all mathematics 
 
5.2 Extensional and intensional set definitions 
 
5.3 Set operations 
 
5.4 Set visualization with Venn diagrams 
 
5.5 Set membership vs. subsets 
 
5.6 Russell‟s paradox 
 
5.7 Theorems of ZFC set theory 
 
5.8 Counting number of elements in sets 
 
5.9 Ordered collections 
 
5.10 Relations 
 
5.11 Functions 
 
6. Abstract algebra 
 
6.1 Binary operations 
 
6.2 Groups 
 
6.3 Rings 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
6.4 Fields 
 
7. Combinatorial analysis 
 
7.1 The basic principle of counting 
 
7.2 Permutations 
 
7.3 Combinations 
 
8. Probability theory 
 
8.1 Basic definitions 
 
8.2 Kolmogorov‟s axioms 
 
8.3 Theorems 
 
8.4 Interpretations of probability 
 
8.5 Random variables 
 
 
8.5.1 Expected value 
 
 
8.5.2 Variance and standard deviation 
 
 
Part 3: General theory of machine learning 
 
 
Part 4: Machine learning algorithms 
 
9. Classification 
 
9.1 Logistic regression 
 
9.2 Gaussian naive Bayesian classifier 
 
10. Regression 
 
10.1 Simple linear regression 
 
11. Clustering 
 
11.1 K-means clustering 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
12. Dimensionality reduction 
 
12.1 Principal component analysis (PCA) 
 
Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 
 
 
Part 1: Introduction to machine learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Chapter 1: From everything to machine learning 
 
The result of this first chapter is a taxonomy (figure 1.1) and its underlying principles. I 
start with “everything” and I end with machine learning. Green nodes represent things 
in which I am interested, and red nodes represent things in which I have no interest. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.1 From everything to machine learning. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
1.1 Introduction 
 
It is impossible for one human being to understand everything. His resources (e.g., time, 
cognitive abilities) are limited, so he must carefully distribute them for worthy goals. 
There is a range of possible broad goals for one human and two representative extremes 
are: 
 
1) understand one thing in a deep way (e.g., Bobby Fischer and chess) 
2) understand many things in a shallow way (e.g., an average high-school 
 
student who understands a bit about more subjects). 
 
I think of all my resources as finite amount of water, and I think of all the possible goals 
that I can pursue as cups. Then the question is: which cups should I fill with water? One 
extreme possibility is to put all my water into a single cup (goal 1). Another extreme 
possibility is to distribute my water uniformly in finitely many cups (goal 2). 
 
I choose to pursue the first broad goal 1) during my lifetime. Next, I need to find 
“the one thing” (i.e., the one cup) which I would like to understand in depth (i.e., fill 
with all my water). The search will be biased and guided by my own personal interests. 
 
Some of the terms that I use initially are vague, but as I make progress I will use 
terms that are defined better. Just like a painter who starts with broad and light handed 
strokes, and incrementally adds more details, so I start with broad terms and 
incrementally I add more details. Although, some concepts are very hard to define 
precisely. For example, Thagard [105]: “Wittgenstein pointed out that there are no 
definitions that capture all and only the instances of complex concepts such as „game‟. 
Such definitions are rarely to be found outside mathematics.”. Sometimes the best we 
can do is to supplement an imprecise definition of a concept with representative 
instances of the concept. 
 
The starting point of the search for my interest is “everything”. I will not try to 
define “everything” precisely. Intuitively speaking, I think of it as “all the things that I 
can potentially think about deliberately (i.e., consciously and intentionally)”, and I 

--- PAGE 14 ---
visualize it as an infinitely big physical object from which I need to remove all the parts 
that I am not interested in. 
 
I use two operations for my search: division and filtering. Division splits one 
thing into more parts based on some common property. Ideally, the parts should be 
jointly exhaustive and mutually exclusive, but sometimes the parts can be fuzzy, and 
sometimes it is even impossible to define exhaustively all the possible parts of one 
whole. When I divide one whole   in two parts    and   , I would like the parts to be 
sufficiently independent, such that, I can study one of them without reference to the 
other. The filtering operation selects things that I personally am interested in and 
excludes things that I am not interested in. My search is a sequence of operations 
(divide, filter, ..., divide, filter) applied beginning from “everything”. In this way, 
eventually I should reach “the one thing” that I would like to devote my life to, and I 
should exclude all the things in which I have no interest and which are irrelevant for my 
path. 
 
The result of this first chapter is a taxonomy (figure 1.1) and its underlying 
principles. I agree with Craver [19] that taxonomies are crucial, but only preparatory for 
explanation: “The development of a taxonomy of kinds is crucial for building scientific 
explanations. ... Sorting is preparatory for, rather than constitutive of, explanation.”. 
The following chapters will use this taxonomy as foundation. 
 
 
1.2 From everything to not-physical things 
 
My goal in this section is not to discuss the nature of objective reality. I do not try to 
answer deep questions about our physical universe (e.g., are there fundamental particles 
that can‟t be split further into smaller particles?). I leave such questions to philosophers 
(to explore the possible) and physicists (to investigate the actual). My goal here is much 
more humble. 
 
I can think deliberately about some thing  . We should differentiate here 
between   and my thought      about  .   can be physical (in the intuitive sense, e.g., 
human brain, transistor, rock) or not-physical. So, I divide “everything” (i.e., all the 

--- PAGE 15 ---
things that I can potentially think about deliberately) in two subjective categories: 
physical and not-physical. I do not claim that there are different kinds of substances, as 
in Cartesian Dualism. I simply create two subjective categories and my goal is: for every 
object   that I can potentially think about deliberately, I should be able to place   in one 
of those two categories. 
 
Having divided “everything” in two categories, next I apply a filtering operation 
that selects all not-physical things and excludes all physical things (i.e., I am interested 
exclusively in not-physical things). This means that during my academic lifetime I 
should think only about not-physical things and I should ignore physical things. For 
example, I am not interested in questions about physical things such as: how does the 
Sun produce energy, how does the human heart work, what is the molecular structure of 
my ground floor, what is gravity, how does light move through physical space, why are 
humans getting older over time and eventually we die, how to cure cancer, how does an 
airplane fly, how does a tree develop over time, how do rivers flow, which materials is 
my computer hardware made of, why is wood easier to break than metal is, are there 
fundamental particles (i.e., particles that can‟t be split into smaller particles), how deep 
can humans investigate physical matter (maybe there is a final point beyond which 
humans can not investigate further due to the limits of our cognitive abilities and our 
best physical measuring devices), and many other similar questions. 
 
In my division of “everything” in two categories (physical and not-physical) 
followed by exclusion of the physical category, there was an implicit assumption that I 
can study not-physical things separately and independently from physical things. Of 
course, objective reality is much messier than that, but given the fact that I am a 
cognitively limited agent, such assumptions seem necessary to me, in order to be able to 
function in our complex world. 
 
One final thing to add in this section is that I will not try to explain why some 
things are interesting to me while others are not. I can search for a possible answer in 
my genome, how I was raised, the people that influenced me, the times I live in, etc., but 
I doubt that I would find a useful answer. At best, I can say that my interest is based on 
my personal feelings towards our universe and the human condition. In some things I 
simply have interest, and in other things I don‟t. I can‟t explain for example why 

--- PAGE 16 ---
physical things don‟t interest me. I can hypothesize that it is because I don‟t like the 
human condition, and therefore I have tendency to try to run away from physical reality 
towards abstract things, but even I don‟t know if that is true. Essentially, I think about 
the problem of choosing my primary interest in the following way. I see all things as 
being made of other things which are related to each other. For example, a tree is bunch 
of things connected to each other, my dog is bunch of things connected to each other, a 
human is bunch of things connected to each other, and in general, the whole universe is 
bunch of things connected to each other. In that sense, speaking at the most abstract 
level, I can say that all things are isomorphic to each other. Then, given that all things 
are isomorphic to each other, the only reason for preferring some things over others, is 
simply due to my personal interests (which are result of my genome and all my life 
experiences). 
 
There is a beautiful scene in the film “Ex Machina” (2014). Caleb and Nathan talk 
about a painting by Jackson Pollock. Nathan says: “He [Pollock] let his mind go blank, 
and his hand go where it wanted. Not deliberate, not random. Some place in between. 
They called it automatic art. What if instead of making art without thinking, he said: 
„You know what? I can‟t paint anything, unless I know exactly why I‟m doing it.‟. What 
would have happened?”. Then Caleb replies: “He never would have made a single 
mark.”. In that sense, I don‟t feel the need to fully understand myself and why some 
things are interesting to me while others are not. I simply follow my intuition on such 
matters and I try not to overthink. 
 
 
1.3 Artificial things 
 
In the previous section, I divided “everything” in two categories: physical and not-
physical. Then, I applied a filtering operation which selects all not-physical things and 
excludes all physical things. At this point, I have the set     of all not-physical things, 
and my goal in this section is to exclude a big chunk of things from     which do not 
interest me. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
I use the predicate “artificial” to divide     in two subsets: artificial not-physical 
things (e.g., a mathematical theory) and not-artificial not-physical things (e.g., other 
minds). Next, I apply a filtering operation which selects the first subset and excludes the 
second subset (i.e., I am interested exclusively in artificial not-physical things). 
 
Now, let‟s define “artificial”. One thing   is artificial iff   is constructed 
deliberately by human beings for some purpose. I am interested only in the special case 
where   can be constructed by myself and   is not-physical (i.e.,   can be constructed 
deliberately in my conscious mind). I will not argue here whether   is “constructed” or 
“discovered”. I will simply say that initially   does not exist in my mind, and after some 
conscious effort, I “construct”   in my mind. It can be argued that   already exists 
independently from me and that I only “discover” it, but such discussion is irrelevant for 
my purpose here. Also, it can be argued whether   is artificial when it is constructed 
unintentionally by human beings. But my feeling is that no matter how precise I get my 
definition of “artificial”, there will always be some cases that are not covered properly. 
So, I lower the standard here and I accept an incomplete subjective definition, which 
means that it is possible that I consider some thing   as artificial, but another person 
may think of   as not-artificial. 
 
 
1.4 Finite and discrete change 
 
In the previous section, I arrived at the set of all artificial not-physical things. Next, I 
divide this set in two subsets based on the predicates: “dynamic” (changing over time), 
“finite”, and “discrete”. One subset contains all the elements for which these three 
predicates are true and the other subset contains the rest of the elements. I apply a 
filtering operation that selects the first subset and excludes the second subset (i.e., I am 
interested exclusively in finite discrete artificial not-physical changes). 
 
One thing   is “dynamic” if it is changing over time. In this context, I define 
“change” abstractly as a sequence of states. But if change is a sequence of states, then 
what stops me from treating this sequence as a “static” thing and not as a “dynamic” 
thing? It seems that it is a matter of perspective whether something is dynamic or not. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
In other words, I can deliberately decide to treat one thing   either as static or as 
dynamic, depending on which perspective is more useful in the context. 
 
In my conscious mind I can construct finitely many things, therefore I can 
construct only changes with finitely many states. Such changes can “represent” or 
“correspond to” changes with infinitely many states (e.g., an infinite loop of instructions 
represented by finitely many instructions in a programming language), but still the 
number of states that I can directly construct is finite. 
 
In terms of similarity between neighboring states, change can be discrete or 
continuous. In a discrete change, neighboring states are separate and distinct things, 
while in a continuous change neighboring states blend into each other and are not easily 
distinguishable. The deliberate thinking that I do in my conscious mind is discrete from 
my subjective perspective, in the sense that I can think about an object  , then I can 
think about a distinct object  , then I can think about another distinct object  , etc. This 
is the type of change that I am interested in, finite and discrete. 
 
 
1.5 Symbolic communication 
 
I can have a thought      about a thing   which exists independently from me 
(“independently” in the sense that other people can also access, i.e., think about  ). But 
how do I communicate      to external entities (e.g., people, computers)? It seems that 
it is necessary (at least in our actual world), that I must execute some physical action 
(e.g., make hand gestures, produce speech sounds) or construct some physical object 
that “represents”      (e.g., draw something in sand, arrange sticks on the ground, write 
symbols on paper). And what is the best way for us human beings to communicate that 
we know of at this point in time? The answer is obvious, it is human language (written 
or spoken form). For communicating with a computer we use a programming language. 
 
A language is a finite set of symbols and rules for combining symbols. A symbol 
can refer to another entity and it is represented by an arbitrary physical object that 
serves as a fundamental building block. For a thought      in my conscious mind, I can 
try to construct a symbolic composite         (i.e., a linguistic expression) which 

--- PAGE 19 ---
“represents”     . This is how my terms correspond to the terms used in the title of the 
book “Language, Thought, and Reality” [109]:   = reality,      = thought,         = 
language. 
 
I apply a filtering operation that selects “human language” for communicating 
with humans and “programming language” for communicating with computers, and it 
excludes all other possible (actually possible or possible to imagine) types of 
communication (e.g., telepathy, which is considered to be pseudoscience). In other 
words, I am interested only in symbolic communication where my thought      is 
represented by a symbolic composite        , which can be interpreted by a human or a 
computer. 
 
I will end this section with a beautiful quote [114]: “By referring to objects and 
ideas not present at the time of communication, a world of possibility is opened.”. 
 
 
1.6 Inductive inference 
 
To summarize the previous sections, my interest at this point is somewhere in the set of 
all “symbolic finite discrete artificial not-physical changes”. In this section, I will make 
my interest a bit more specific by using two predicates: “inference” and “inductive”. I 
divide the above mentioned set in two subsets: the first subset contains all the elements 
for which the two predicates are both true, and the second subset contains all the other 
elements. Next, I apply a filtering operation which selects the first subset and excludes 
the second subset (i.e., I am interested exclusively in changes which are inductive 
inferences). 
 
I define “inference” in this context as the process of constructing an argument. A 
process is a sequence of steps executed in order, to achieve a particular goal. An 
argument can be divided into more parts: premises, conclusion, and a relation between 
them. The premises and the conclusion are propositions represented by symbolic 
composites (i.e., sentences in some language). For a sentence   which is written on 
paper as     , I can see      and I can try to construct an interpretation         in my 

--- PAGE 20 ---
conscious mind, and if I succeed I can say that I “understand” what the sentence   
“means”. 
 
Based on the type of relation between the premises and the conclusion, we can 
talk about different kinds of arguments. For valid deductive arguments, if the premises 
are true then the conclusion must be true also. In other words, the truth of the 
conclusion follows with total certainty given the truth of the premises (e.g., theorems in 
geometry). For strong inductive arguments, the premises provide strong support (i.e., 
evidence) for the truth of the conclusion (e.g., weather forecast), with some degree of 
certainty. How do we measure this “degree of certainty” (i.e., “degree of uncertainty”, 
“degree of belief”)? There are more ways to do this, but in this book I will use only 
probability theory. 
 
To summarize, my primary interest is in inductive inference, but of course, for 
constructing inductive arguments I will use many mathematical deductive components. 
I can‟t completely exclude deductive inference, but I can say that it will serve only as 
support for my primary interest, i.e., inductive inference. 
 
 
1.7 Carl Craver’s hierarchy of mechanisms 
 
I will start this section with functionalism [59]: “Functionalism in the philosophy of 
mind is the doctrine that what makes something a mental state of a particular type does 
not depend on its internal constitution, but rather on the way it functions, or the role it 
plays, in the system of which it is a part.”. For my path, functionalism offers a useful 
abstract perspective, but it is not sufficient alone. As stated before, I want to understand 
one thing in depth, rather than understand more things in a shallow way. To achieve my 
goal, I must supplement functionalism with actual working mechanisms. According to 
Carl Craver [19], a mechanism is a set of entities and activities organized in some way 
for a certain purpose. An entity in such mechanism can be a mechanism itself, therefore 
we can talk about a hierarchy of mechanisms, i.e., levels of mechanisms. In Craver‟s 
words: “Levels of mechanisms are levels of composition, but the composition relation is 
not, at base, spatial or material. The relata are behaving mechanisms at higher levels 

--- PAGE 21 ---
and their components at lower levels. Lower-level components are organized together to 
form higher-level components.”. In the next section, I will talk about the specific kinds 
of mechanisms that I am interested in (i.e., computer algorithms and programs). 
 
 
 
Figure 1.2 A phenomenon is explained by a mechanism composed of other mechanisms. This 
figure was taken from Craver [18]. 
 
 
1.8 Computer algorithms and programs 
 
As stated before, I am interested in the process of inductive inference, but who will 
execute the steps of this process? Should I execute them one by one in my conscious 
mind? Or maybe it is better to construct a machine for the job, which is faster than me 
and has more memory (i.e., it can execute significantly more steps in a time period and 
it can handle significantly more things). The best machine of such kind that we have in 
our time is the digital computer. There are other benefits of using a computer besides 
speed and memory, such as: automation (i.e., a computer can do the job while I do other 
things), and also the process is made explicit and accessible to everyone instead of being 
present only in my mind. 
 
Richard Feynman, a famous physicist in the 20th century, has said: “What I 
cannot create, I do not understand.”. In that sense, I want to understand inductive 

--- PAGE 22 ---
inference by creating mechanisms that will do inductive inference. But what kind of 
mechanisms? I will use a computer to extend my limited cognitive abilities, therefore I 
am interested in computer algorithms (abstract mechanisms) and computer programs 
(concrete mechanisms). A computer algorithm is a sequence of steps which can be 
realized (i.e., implemented) by a computer program written in a programming language, 
and then that program can be executed by a computer. 
 
The benefits of using computers are ubiquitous. For example, Thagard [105] 
argues for a computational approach in philosophy of science: “There are at least three 
major gains that computer programs offer to cognitive psychology and computational 
philosophy of science: (1) computer science provides a systematic vocabulary for 
describing structures and mechanisms; (2) the implementation of ideas in a running 
program is a test of internal coherence; and (3) running the program can provide tests 
of foreseen and unforeseen consequences of hypotheses.”. In general, when possible, we 
prefer theories that are mathematically precise and computationally testable. 
 
 
1.9 Our actual world vs. other possible worlds 
 
I can imagine many possible worlds that are similar or very different from our actual 
world. In logic, a proposition is “necessarily true” iff it is true in all possible worlds. 
Given this distinction between our actual world and other possible worlds, I can ask 
myself which world would I like to study? Our actual world already has a vast amount of 
complex and interesting problems waiting to be solved, so why waste time on other 
possible worlds which are not relevant for our actual world. I am interested primarily in 
our actual world. I am willing to explore other possible worlds only if I expect to find 
something relevant for our actual world (with this I exclude a big part of science fiction 
and other kinds of speculative theories). 
 
Pedro Domingos [27] argues that we should use the knowledge that we have 
about our actual world to help us in creating better machine learning algorithms, and 
maybe one day a single universal learning algorithm for our world. In other words, we 
should ignore other possible worlds and focus on our actual world, and incorporate the 

--- PAGE 23 ---
knowledge about our world in our machine learning algorithms. So, he is not trying to 
create a universal learning algorithm for all possible worlds, but only for our actual 
world. More generally, learning algorithms should be adapted for a particular world, i.e., 
they should exploit the already known structure of their world. 
 
 
1.10 Machine learning 
 
In this section, I provide intuitive definitions of machine learning, and I say that 
machine learning is the field of my primary interest. It satisfies all my criteria discussed 
so far and it has an infinite variety of interesting applications. In the rest of this book I 
will explore machine learning in more breadth and depth. 
 
Arthur Samuel defined machine learning in 1959 as the “field of study that gives 
computers the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed”. 
 
In the first lecture of his MOOC course Learning from Data, Prof. Abu-Mostafa 
says that the essence of machine learning is: 
 
 
1) a pattern (i.e., regularities, structure) exists 
 
2) we cannot pin it down mathematically (i.e., analytically with explicit rules) 
 
3) we have data on it. 
 
There are interesting questions about point (2): why can‟t we pin down mathematically 
certain patterns, what is their essential common characteristic, are such patterns too 
complex for us? 
 
Here is another similar definition from the book Understanding Machine 
Learning [91]: “... a human programmer cannot provide an explicit, fine-detailed 
specification of how such tasks should be executed.”. 
 
To compare, Tom Mitchell‟s [67] definition of machine learning is: “... a machine 
learns with respect to a particular task T, performance metric P, and type of experience 
E, if the system reliably improves its performance P at task T, following experience E.”. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
Jason Brownlee‟s [11] definition is: “Machine Learning is the training of a model 
from data that generalizes a decision against a performance measure.”. He characterizes 
machine learning problems as: “complex problems that resist our decomposition and 
procedural solutions”. 
 
Also, you might have heard somewhere people describing machine learning as 
“programs that create programs”. 
 
My personal one-line definition for machine learning is: “algorithms that learn 
from data”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Chapter 2: Philosophy of machine learning 
 
In this chapter I will talk about philosophical foundations of machine learning, in order 
to motivate and prepare the reader for the technical parts presented in later chapters. 
 
 
2.1 The purpose of machine learning 
 
A machine learning algorithm can be: abstract (i.e., it can not be implemented directly 
as a computer program that can learn from data) or concrete (i.e., it can be implemented 
directly as a computer program that can learn from data). One very important role of 
abstract ML algorithms is to generalize concrete ML algorithms, and therefore they can 
be used to prove propositions on a more abstract level, and also to organize the field of 
machine learning. 
 
The primary goal in the field of machine learning is solving problems with 
concrete algorithms that can learn from data. All other things are secondary to concrete 
algorithms, such as: properties, concepts, interpretations, theorems, theories, etc. In 
other words, the primary goal is the construction of concrete mechanisms, more 
specifically, concrete learning algorithms. For example, Korb [56]: “Machine learning 
studies inductive strategies as they might be carried out by algorithms. The philosophy 
of science studies inductive strategies as they appear in scientific practice.”. To 
summarize, my personal approach to machine learning is concrete-algorithms-first. Just 
to clarify, I do not claim that all other things are irrelevant, I simply put more emphasis 
on concrete algorithms and I consider all other things as secondary support. 
 
So, if the primary goal in machine learning is the construction of concrete 
learning algorithms, then we can ask the question: how many distinct concrete machine 
learning algorithms are there?  The possible answers are: 1) infinitely many, 2) finitely 
many but still too many for a single human being to learn them all in one lifetime, 3) 
finitely many such that one human being can learn them all in one lifetime. No matter 
what the answer is, my goal as one human being remains the same: to maximize the 
number of distinct concrete machine learning algorithms that I know. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
 
Machine learning has descriptive goals (i.e., what is   actually like?), normative 
goals (i.e., how should   be done optimally?), and prescriptive goals (i.e., what is a good 
pragmatic way to do  ?). For example, when we want to describe a dataset, we pursue 
primarily a descriptive goal, i.e., we want to describe the actual state of something. If we 
want to talk about optimal learning algorithms and how learning should be done, then 
we are pursuing normative goals. And if we are interested in the pragmatic day to day 
decisions that practitioners make, and we want to know what works well in practice, 
then we are talking about prescriptive goals. 
 
Essentially, machine learning is a pragmatic solution to Hume‟s problem of 
induction. It addresses the question: is it possible to obtain knowledge about 
unobserved objects given some knowledge about observed objects from the same space? 
We can ask a similar question in terms of time: is it possible to obtain knowledge about 
the relatively near future given knowledge about the relatively recent past? Machine 
learning addresses these problems pragmatically by making various assumptions (also 
called inductive bias). Sometimes we succeed, and other times we fail with serious 
consequences. Nevertheless, inductive learning without assumptions  is impossible, i.e., 
making assumptions is necessary for inductive learning. For example, if we want to 
make predictions about the relatively near future, and the only knowledge that we have 
available is knowledge about the relatively recent past, then we must assume that the 
knowledge about the past is relevant for the future, i.e., we expect the near future to be 
similar (more or less) to the recent past. We really don‟t have much choice here. Such 
assumptions constrain the number of possibilities to a number that we can manage. 
Imagine if we don‟t assume that the near future will be similar to the recent past, then 
all kinds of possibilities would be left open, such as: flying elephants, people running 
faster than the speed of light, angels sent by God himself to pay your rent, etc. Without 
assumptions you literally would not be able to function in our world. You will spend 
your entire life paralyzed, while the person next to you simply made the assumptions 
and will probably live happily ever after, even though his assumptions can‟t be proved to 
be true. 
 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
2.2 Related fields 
 
Imagine machine learning as a node in a network. Which other fields is it related to and 
how? I will talk about one type of relation, where one field “uses” another field. Machine 
learning uses fields such as: probability theory, statistics, calculus, linear algebra, 
optimization, information theory, etc., and it is used by other fields such as: computer 
vision, speech recognition, text mining, artificial intelligence in general, etc. The first set 
of fields is a set of building blocks used in machine learning, while the second set of 
fields is a set of applications where machine learning itself is used as a building block. 
 
I mentioned various fields related to machine learning, but what about human 
learning? I will quote Tom Mitchell [67] on this topic: “To date, however, the insights 
Machine Learning has gained from studies of Human Learning are much weaker than 
those it has gained from Statistics and Computer Science, due primarily to the weak 
state of our understanding of Human Learning. ... Over the coming years it is reasonable 
to expect the synergy between studies of Human Learning and Machine Learning to 
grow substantially, as they are close neighbors in the landscape of core scientific 
questions.”. 
 
Now we can ask ourselves, is it necessary to be an expert in the fields that 
machine learning uses in order to be an expert in machine learning? No, you can use the 
interfaces of those fields and apply them in machine learning solutions. For example, 
experts in probability theory can pursue the goal of proving mathematical theorems in 
their field, and then an expert in machine learning can obtain sufficient knowledge 
about probability theory in order to apply it to machine learning problems. Of course, 
knowing more about probability theory will make your job easier in machine learning, 
but being an expert in probability theory (or other fields) alone is not sufficient for 
becoming an expert in machine learning. Also, you don‟t have to be an expert in 
programming languages like R or Python for example. You should know just enough to 
be able to implement your learning algorithms. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 28 ---
2.3 Subfields of machine learning 
 
The term “machine learning” refers to a very broad area. It is almost meaningless to say 
that you are a “machine learning expert”. It is just too vague, it is almost like saying that 
you are a “computer science expert”, or a “science expert”, or even just an “expert”. 
There is only one machine learning expert and that is Machine Learning God. The rest 
of us can only hope to become experts in some narrow domains in ML. There are so 
many branches that branch out into even more branches, which then branch out further 
and so on to infinity and beyond. Even when we think that we have finally solved some 
problem, few years later a new perspective on that problem can change the whole 
“solution”, or maybe even the problem definition itself. That is why my approach to ML 
is very humble. My goals are to obtain incomplete but relatively sufficient general 
knowledge about ML, and then to specialize in one or few very specific subfields in ML. I 
would like to extend the field of ML, and I can achieve that only by focusing on very 
specific subfields. 
 
There is no one “best” way to divide ML into subfields. Imagine all ML concrete 
algorithms living in one infinite-dimensional space. In other words, any particular ML 
concrete algorithm can be described in terms of infinitely many dimensions/aspects. 
That is my intuition on this topic. We can only construct subjective context-dependent 
finite incomplete taxonomies of ML. In the construction of your taxonomy tree, at each 
step you would have to select a dimension as a splitting criterion. But which dimension 
should you choose from the infinitely many dimensions available? There is no objective 
criterion for choosing “the best” dimension at a given step, therefore, to repeat again, we 
can only construct subjective taxonomies which can be useful to us in particular 
contexts. So pick whatever taxonomy is intuitive for you. As for me personally, I will use 
the following dimensions to divide ML into subfields (the dimensions are explained in 
order, one paragraph per dimension): 
 
 form of inductive argument 
 learning style: supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, reinforcement 
 active vs. passive learning 

--- PAGE 29 ---
 batch vs. online learning 
 type of data-generating process: statistical or other 
 instance-based vs. model-based learning 
 prediction vs. inference 
 parametric vs. non-parametric function estimation 
 Bayesian vs. non-Bayesian learning 
 human designed features vs. learned features (representation learning) 
 shallow vs. deep learning (more levels of composition). 
 
 
There are different forms of inductive arguments: prediction about the relatively 
near future given knowledge about the relatively recent past, argument from analogy, 
inductive generalization (i.e., inference from relatively small sample to a whole 
population), causal inferences (i.e., inference from cause to effect or the other way 
around), etc. 
 
In supervised learning we learn a mapping      , from given observed 
mappings between   and  . Supervised learning can be divided into classification and 
regression, based on the type of the output variable  . In classification   is discrete, and 
in regression   is continuous. 
 
Unsupervised learning can be divided into: clustering, dimensionality reduction, 
etc. In clustering, we want to find how objects group among each other, i.e., we want to 
find clusters in the given data. In dimensionality reduction, we want to reduce the 
number of dimensions that we use to describe the objects that we study, without losing 
relevant information. Essentially, in clustering we reduce the number of objects/rows, 
while in dimensionality reduction we reduce the number of dimensions/columns. 
 
If the learner interacts with the environment, then we call it an active learner, 
otherwise it is a passive learner. By “interacts” I mean that the learner can actively select 
which information to use from its environment, or it can even change the environment, 
i.e., it can influence the data it gets for learning. 
 
When we have all the data available and we run a learning algorithm on it once, 
we call that batch learning. On the other hand, if the data comes one piece at a time in 

--- PAGE 30 ---
an incremental way, and learning also is done incrementally, then we call that online 
learning. 
 
Next, let‟s talk about the type of the data-generating process. To paint a more 
intuitive picture, let‟s call the process which generates the data, a teacher. It is a teacher 
in the sense that it gives something to the learner to be learned, just like your high-
school teacher gave you books and then he tested you. Some teachers are really helpful 
to students, others are less helpful, and some are even adversarial and make the 
learning process harder. We can also talk about Nature as a teacher in the sense that it 
generates data from which we can learn. But how helpful is Nature as a teacher, does it 
care about the needs of our learning algorithms? Does Nature sit down and think 
something like “I need to make gravity more visible so these poor humans can learn 
about it”? Of course not. But then, is Nature adversarial maybe, in the sense that it 
deliberately makes our learning process harder? Again, no. Nature simply does not care 
about us, it does what it wants, with or without us. To say this in a more fancy way, we 
say that the process by which Nature generates data is a “random process”, and we say 
that learning from such data is “statistical learning”. It is not a random process in the 
sense that there is no structure and that it is just a chaotic unexplainable mess, but in 
the sense that the data-generating process is completely independent from us and our 
needs. 
 
In instance-based learning the generalization decision is based on instances in 
the data, while in model-based learning the generalization decision is produced by a 
model that is constructed from the data. 
 
If we care primarily about the accuracy of our predictions and not so much about 
the interpretability of our model, then we say that our goal is prediction. In contrast, if 
our primary goal is to construct a model from the data which can then be interpreted to 
provide us with some insights about the structure in the data, then we say that our goal 
is inference. 
 
Many problems in machine learning reduce to estimating a function      , 
from some given observed mappings between   and  . There are two main high-level 
approaches to function estimation: parametric and non-parametric. For parametric 
function estimation, first we make an assumption about the form of the function  , i.e., 

--- PAGE 31 ---
we choose a function class, and then we select the best function that we can from that 
class. So basically, we limit the number of possible functions by making an assumption 
about the form of  , and then we pick one particular function from the reduced set of 
possible functions. For non-parametric function estimation, we don‟t make assumptions 
about the form of the function  , and so virtually all possible functions are available to 
choose from. As you might imagine, we need a lot more data for non-parametric 
function estimation. You can think of each data point as an additional constraint that 
excludes some functions from the set of all possible functions. 
 
Bayesian learning is when we explicitly use Bayes‟ theorem to model the 
relationship between the input   and the output  , by computing the posterior 
probability       . In contrast, non-Bayesian learning is when Bayes‟ theorem is not 
explicitly used. 
 
For a given problem, we can design the features that will be used for learning or 
an algorithm can learn features itself. The second case is called representation learning. 
 
Finally, deep learning is a subfield of representation learning where we have 
layers on top of other layers, such that each layer learns new features for the data 
provided by its input layer and then it provides those new features to its output layer. 
 
 
2.4 Essential components of machine learning 
 
In this section I will talk about essential components of ML which are present in 
virtually all cases. 
 
 
2.4.1 Variables 
 
In the beginning there was nothing. Machine Learning God said “Let there be 
variables!”. And there were variables. And many other things made of variables. 
 
A variable is represented by a name and a set of possible values (i.e., states), such 
that, the values are related among each other in a relevant way. For example, a variable 

--- PAGE 32 ---
called   and its possible values        , or a variable   and its possible values 
                         , or a variable   that can take any value from the set of real 
numbers  . There are other terms (i.e., synonyms) that connote the same general 
concept of “variable”, such as: attribute, feature, aspect, dimension, property, predicate, 
column (for tabular data), etc. 
 
The main types of basic variables in machine learning are: qualitative (nominal 
and ordinal) and quantitative (discrete and continuous). The values of a nominal 
variable are names, while the values of an ordinal variable are also names but in some 
order such that one value comes before another. Quantitative variables represent 
quantities which can be counted (discrete) or measured in degrees (continuous). We talk 
about variables also in other fields. In linear algebra we solve systems of linear 
equations with unknown variables. In optimization we search for values of variables that 
optimize a mathematical function. In probability theory we talk about random variables 
and the probability that a variable can take a particular value. In general, we use 
variables everywhere to represent aspects/dimensions of objects. A particular object is 
represented by a tuple of values for variables. In other words, Reid [86]: “Generally 
speaking, many learning problems use features [variables] to describe instances 
[objects]. These can be thought of as projections of the instances down to simple values 
such as numbers or categories.”. 
 
 
2.4.2 Data, information, knowledge and wisdom 
 
Having defined variables, next I define “data” (or “dataset”) as a set of values for 
qualitative or quantitative variables. Some etymology would be useful here to paint a 
better picture of the term [110]: “Using the word „data‟ to mean „transmittable and 
storable computer information‟ was first done in 1946. ... The Latin word data is the 
plural of datum, „(thing) given‟.”. Data is “given” in the sense that there are other 
unknown things which are not given, and we would like to learn something about them 
from what is given and available to us. 

--- PAGE 33 ---
 
Data sitting alone on a computer is meaningless. An interpreter (i.e., agent, 
observer) is needed to make sense of the data. I can take data   and interpret it in my 
mind. Interpretation is the process, and information is the result of that process, so 
Information = Interpretation (Data). Next, knowledge can be defined as “justified true 
belief” (a basic standard definition in epistemology, which is not without its own 
problems, e.g., see the Gettier problem). According to this definition, in order to know 
 , you must believe that   is true,   must actually be true, and you must have 
justification for your belief why   is true. Knowledge is harder to define and more 
abstract than information and data, and information is more abstract than data. Finally, 
we can talk about “wisdom”, i.e., the ability to apply knowledge in different scenarios. As 
you might imagine, wisdom is even more abstract and harder to define than knowledge. 
 
There are different kinds of data: multimedia (image, video, audio), text, numeric 
tables, time series, network data, etc. Speaking in terms of variables, we can say that a 
grayscale image is a two-dimensional grid of variables that can take values from a 
discrete set which represents shades of gray. Such a grid of variables can be represented 
on the computer as a matrix, or as a one-dimensional array, such that each row from the 
matrix comes after its predecessor row. A video then is a sequence of such images. Text 
is a chain of discrete variables which can take values from a finite alphabet in some 
language. 
 
Now we can ask an interesting question: can we reduce these different data types 
to one common form (e.g., variables and relations between variables) so that our 
learners can work independently from the data type? I don‟t expect a general answer 
here, but still, I expect that it is useful in many cases to try to think about your data in a 
way that is independent from the particular type of data that you work with. For 
example [107]: “Despite this apparent heterogeneity, it will help us to think of all data 
fundamentally as arrays of numbers.”. 
 
Now that we have talked about variables and data, we can use these two as 
primitive building blocks to define more complex things such as: data distributions and 
probability distributions. A data distribution is a function, such that, for a given set of 
values of variables, it tells you the count of objects in the dataset that have those values. 
On the other hand, a probability distribution for one or more random variables, tells you 

--- PAGE 34 ---
the probability that you will observe objects with certain values. We can summarize a 
distribution with single values such as: minimum, maximum, median, mode, mean 
(average), standard deviation, variance, etc. Then, we can group distributions based on 
similarity into distribution families such as the Gaussian distribution family. So you get 
the idea. By using the two primitives “variables” and “data”, we can construct more 
complex objects. 
 
 
2.4.3 The gangs of ML: problems, functions, datasets, models, 
evaluators, optimization, and performance measures 
 
In machine learning, we are interested in problems which can be solved by algorithms 
that learn from data. We can think of problems as questions whose answer is unknown 
to us, but if we could find the answer then it could potentially be of value to us. 
Problems can be described formally and informally in more or less precise ways. As 
mentioned previously, in order to solve learning problems we must make assumptions 
(general or specific for each problem). Sometimes we make implicit assumptions 
without being aware of that. For any given problem, it is very important to make our 
assumptions explicit. For example, if we want to predict the behavior of some Facebook 
users, our algorithm might ignore the location of the users, and so implicitly we have 
made an assumption that location is irrelevant for our problem. That may be the case 
indeed, but still we must state the assumption explicitly. 
 
Real-world learning problems are messy and they are associated with lots of 
information that we don‟t need for solving them. Once we are given a real-world 
problem, the next step is to abstract away and to remove all the unnecessary 
information. This is what your high-school math teacher meant when he told you to 
“extract the essence of the problem”. You should reduce the real-world problem to one 
or more functions which are studied in machine learning, such as: classification, 
regression, clustering, dimensionality reduction, etc. After you finish this step, welcome 
to the world of machine learning and say goodbye to the cruel human world. 

--- PAGE 35 ---
 
Next, we can think about relevant data that we can use to “learn” (i.e., construct) 
our function, and therefore to solve our problem, and answer our question. We can go 
out and collect data, or maybe we can generate data ourselves on a computer. Our 
collected dataset is called a sample, and the whole set of possible observations is called 
the population. Usually for real-world problems the sample is magnitudes smaller than 
the population, and here exactly lies the challenge, to learn something about a very large 
population of objects given a small sample. As you might imagine, the sample must be 
sufficiently representative of (i.e., similar to) the population. The collected data can be 
split into a train subset and a test subset. This is necessary because we want to learn 
something about objects which are not in our dataset, that is, we want to generalize from 
our small sample data to the whole population. So we must train on one data subset, and 
test on another, to see how well our learned model performs on unseen data. 
 
Once we have defined a function to be learned and we have collected relevant 
data, then we can think about models (“model classes” to be more precise). A model 
class 
defines 
the 
initial 
hypothesis 
space, 
i.e., 
the 
set 
of 
all 
possible 
models/hypotheses/answers to our question. Some hypotheses are better than others, 
and we use evaluators to tell us if a hypothesis    is better than another hypothesis   . 
After defining the hypothesis space, and an evaluator function which tells us which 
hypotheses are better, then we can optimize (with an iterative algorithm or analytical 
solution) to find “the best hypothesis” in the space, and if that is not possible then 
hopefully we can find a “sufficiently good hypothesis”. 
 
By adding more assumptions for our model class, we basically add more 
constraints and we decrease the number of hypotheses. Also, we can attach probabilities 
to the hypotheses in our model class, so that some hypotheses are preferred over others. 
Such probabilities represent our prior knowledge about the specific problem. For 
example, we can prefer simpler hypotheses over more complex hypotheses, based on the 
principle known as “Occam‟s Razor”. For such purpose we would need to use a 
complexity measure. 
 
Finally, after our optimizer finds a good hypothesis/model (“good” according to 
our evaluator), then we can test our learned model, but this time it is not the evaluator 
that tells us how good our model is, instead, we test our model on unseen data and we 

--- PAGE 36 ---
measure its success with a performance measure. The unseen data in combination with 
the learned model and a performance measure, will give us the ultimate answer of how 
good our model is. As Richard Feynman has said (with my comments in brackets): “In 
general we look for a new law [model] by the following process. First we guess 
[hypothesize] it. Then we compute the consequences of the guess to see what would be 
implied if this law that we guessed is right. Then we compare the result of the 
computation to nature, with experiment or experience, compare it directly with 
observation [data], to see if it works. If it disagrees with experiment it is wrong. In that 
simple statement is the key to science [machine learning]. It does not make any 
difference how beautiful your guess is. It does not make any difference how smart you 
are, who made the guess, or what his name is – if it disagrees with experiment it is 
wrong. That is all there is to it.”. We can adapt this to machine learning and say: “If the 
trained model disagrees with unseen data, it is wrong. That is all there is to it.”. 
 
So what does it mean to say that a machine learning solution is not good for our 
problem? Well, the reason may be: 1) the dataset does not contain a pattern that is 
relevant for the problem, 2) the dataset contains a relevant pattern, but the pattern is 
not visible (i.e., learnable) and we need to transform the dataset to make the pattern 
visible, 3) the dataset contains a relevant pattern, and the pattern is visible, but our 
particular learner can‟t extract it (in that case try other models, evaluators or 
optimizers). About point (3), say the pattern that we would like to extract is   , but 
instead our learner extracts   . One common problem is when    is not general enough, 
i.e., it captures low-level details in the particular data sample, but it fails to generalize 
well on unseen data. In other words, the learner fails to capture the more high-level 
abstract overarching patterns. This is called overfitting. For example, if you study a book 
on physics and you only remember every single letter and number, and you can literally 
recite the whole book from start to finish, you still haven‟t learned anything, actually you 
have learned nothing at all. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 37 ---
2.5 Levels in machine learning 
 
When I started writing this book, I had a vague intuitive feeling about what levels are. I 
thought of levels in the following way: you start with a set of objects, you combine them 
somehow and then you get more complex objects, then you combine such complex 
objects to produce even more complex objects, and so on to infinity. After reading Carl 
Craver‟s book Explaining the Brain, this intuition became more explicit and precise. 
 
Craver [19] provides a general definition for levels, and he also differentiates 
between different kinds of levels: “The term „level‟ is multiply ambiguous. Its application 
requires only a set of items and a way of ordering them as higher or lower. Not 
surprisingly, then, the term „level‟ has several common uses in contemporary 
neuroscience. ... To name a few, there are levels of abstraction, analysis, behavior, 
complexity, description, explanation, function, generality, organization, science, and 
theory.”. All these kinds of levels can be useful also in machine learning. Maybe there 
are specific kinds of levels unique to the subject matter of machine learning, for 
example, levels of learners where one learner uses other learners as building blocks, as 
in the subfield of Deep Learning. 
 
Another interesting example of levels in machine learning is the overall process 
of applying machine learning, beginning from humans. I, a human being, can create a 
partial solution to a learning problem, and then the learner can add tons of details to 
that and turn it into a detailed final solution. For example, Pedro Domingos [27] says: 
“The standard solution is to assume we know the form of the truth, and the learner‟s job 
is to flesh it out.”. Outside of machine learning, Craver [19] explores this idea more 
generally: “Between sketches and complete descriptions lies a continuum of mechanism 
schemata whose working is only partially understood. ... Progress in building 
mechanistic explanations involves movement along both the possibly-plausibly-actually 
axis and along the sketch-schemata-mechanism axis.”. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 38 ---
 
 
 
Part 2: The building blocks of machine learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 39 ---
Chapter 3: Natural language 
 
A natural language is [111]: “any language that has evolved naturally in humans through 
use and repetition without conscious planning or premeditation.”. 
 
 
3.1 Natural language functions 
 
Natural language can be used for many functions [51]: “Ordinary language, as most of us 
are at least vaguely aware, serves various functions in our day-to-day lives. The 
twentieth-century philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein thought the number of these 
functions to be virtually unlimited.”. 
 
In general, during my academic lifetime, I will primarily use natural language for 
one linguistic function: to convey information (i.e., cognitive meaning). I will avoid 
other linguistic functions such as: to express or evoke feelings (i.e., emotive meaning). 
Logic is primarily concerned with cognitive meaning. 
 
 
3.2 Terms, sentences and propositions 
 
We use symbols from a finite alphabet to construct words and sentences. There are 
different kinds of sentences: statement, question, proposal, suggestion, command, 
exclamation, etc. 
 
In science we are primarily interested in statements. A statement is a declarative 
sentence that has a truth value: either true or false. The information content, also called 
the meaning of a statement, is called a proposition. A statement contains one or more 
terms. A term is [51]: “any word or arrangement of words that may serve as the subject 
of a statement.”. There are different kinds of terms: proper name (e.g., Stefan Stavrev), 
common name (e.g., human), and descriptive phrase (e.g., author of the book Machine 
Learning God). In contrast, these are not terms: verbs, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, 
conjunctions, etc. 

--- PAGE 40 ---
3.3 Definition and meaning of terms 
 
We can attach cognitive meaning to a term by constructing a definition for that term. 
Meaning can be extensional (i.e., the members of the class that the term denotes) or 
intensional (i.e., the attributes that the term connotes). A definition has two 
components: definiendum (i.e., what is being defined) and definiens (i.e., the words that 
do the defining). Definitions can be extensional or intensional, based on the type of 
meaning that they attach to a term. 
 
An extensional definition assigns meaning to a term by specifying the objects that 
the term denotes. Extensional definitions can be: demonstrative, enumerative, or 
definition by subclass. We define a term with a demonstrative definition when we point 
with our finger to an object and we say the term‟s name. Enumerative definition, as its 
name suggests, enumerates all the objects that the term refers to. Definition by subclass 
defines a term by associating it with an object from one of its subclasses (e.g., flower 
means rose). 
 
An intensional definition assigns meaning to a term by defining the properties 
that the term connotes. I will discuss four kinds of intensional definitions: synonymous 
definition, etymological definition, operational definition, and definition by genus and 
difference. A synonymous definition defines a term   by associating it with an already 
defined term   that connotes the same properties. An etymological definition defines a 
term based on the term‟s history of usage. An operational definition specifies 
experimental procedures for determining whether the term applies to a certain thing. A 
definition by genus and difference starts with an initial relatively large class, and then 
uses a differentiating property to define the term and separate it from the other 
elements in the class. 
 
 
3.4 Ambiguity and vagueness 
 
Typical problems with the meaning of terms are ambiguity and vagueness [51]: “The 
difference between ambiguity and vagueness is that vague terminology allows for a 

--- PAGE 41 ---
relatively continuous range of interpretations, whereas ambiguous terminology allows 
for multiple discrete interpretations. A vague expression creates a blur of meaning, 
whereas an ambiguous expression mixes up otherwise clear meanings.”. For example, 
“love” is a vague term. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 42 ---
Chapter 4: Logic 
 
I think of logic as a language that is more precise than natural language. We express our 
messy natural language statements as precise logical statements, and then we use logical 
inference to evaluate their truth. In the field of logic we study how to construct and 
evaluate arguments. 
 
 
4.1 Arguments 
 
An argument is a set of statements, i.e., it has more premise statements and one 
conclusion statement. When we evaluate a given argument, we should ask ourselves two 
key questions: 1) are all the premises true? and 2) is the conclusion supported by the 
premises? 
 
There are other kinds of sets of statements which are not arguments, such as 
explanations and conditionals (if-then statements). In arguments we want to prove that 
the conclusion is true, given that the premises are true. In contrast, in explanations we 
want to know why the conclusion is true. Conditionals have the form    , where   is 
called the antecedent statement and   is called the consequent statement. A conditional 
is a representation of sufficient and necessary conditions. For example, if     is true, 
then we say that   is a sufficient condition for  , and that   is a necessary condition for 
 . 
 
 
4.2 Deductive vs. inductive arguments 
 
Based on the strength of the support relation between the premises and the conclusion, 
there are two main kinds of arguments: deductive and inductive. 
 
Deductive arguments can be either valid or invalid. For a valid deductive 
argument, it is impossible for the conclusion to be false, given that the premises are 
true. For an invalid deductive argument, it is possible for the conclusion to be false, 

--- PAGE 43 ---
given that the premises are true. A sound deductive argument is a valid deductive 
argument with true premises. An unsound deductive argument is an invalid deductive 
argument or a valid deductive argument with false premises. For sound deductive 
arguments we say that the conclusion is necessarily/certainly/absolutely/definitely true. 
 
While for valid deductive arguments we can say that the information content of 
the conclusion is entailed by the premises, that is not the case for inductive arguments 
[51]: “In general, inductive arguments are such that the content of the conclusion is in 
some way intended to „go beyond‟ the content of the premises.”. A strong inductive 
argument is one for which it is improbable that the conclusion is false, given that the 
premises are true. If an inductive argument is not strong, we call it a weak inductive 
argument. A cogent inductive argument is a strong inductive argument with true 
premises, which satisfies the total evidence requirement, i.e., all relevant information is 
included in the premises. An uncogent inductive argument is the negative of a cogent 
inductive argument. For cogent inductive arguments we say that the conclusion is 
probable/plausible/likely, given that the premises are true. 
 
There are different forms of inductive arguments: prediction about the relatively 
near future given knowledge about the relatively recent past, argument from analogy, 
inductive generalization (i.e., inference from relatively small sample to a whole 
population), causal inferences (i.e., inference from cause to effect or the other way 
around), etc. 
 
For inductive reasoning to work, we must make assumptions [51]: “All inductive 
arguments depend on what philosophers call the uniformity of nature.”. For example, to 
make predictions about the future, we must assume that the relatively near future will 
be more or less similar to the relatively recent past. 
 
 
4.3 Propositional logic 
 
The fundamental building blocks of propositional logic are statements (i.e., declarative 
sentences) that represent propositions. A statement can be simple (i.e., it does not 

--- PAGE 44 ---
contain other statements nor logical operators), or compound (i.e., it contains at least 
one simple statement and at least one logical operator). 
 
There are five logical operators for combining statements: negation (not  ), 
conjunction (and  ), disjunction (or  ), material implication (if then  ), and material 
equivalence (if and only if  ). The truth value of a compound statement is completely 
determined by the truth values of its component statements and the truth-table 
definitions of the five logical operators: 
 
Negation 
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
Conjunction 
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Disjunction 
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 45 ---
Material implication 
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Material equivalence 
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
A compound statement is logically true (i.e., tautology) if it is always true 
regardless of the truth values of its component statements, and it is logically false (i.e., 
contradiction) if it is always false regardless of the truth values of its component 
statements. If a compound statement is neither tautology nor contradiction, then it is 
called a contingent statement, and its truth value depends on the truth values of its 
component statements. 
 
Two statements are logically equivalent if they have the same truth values. If two 
statements have opposite truth values, then they are called contradictory statements. 
 
Two or more statements are consistent if there is at least one line in the truth 
table where both are true, otherwise they are inconsistent. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 46 ---
4.3.1 Natural deduction 
 
Natural deduction is a proof calculus, more specifically, a set of inference rules. We use 
it to derive conclusions of valid arguments in propositional logic. An inference rule is a 
valid argument form. Natural deduction is called “natural” because it is similar to the 
reasoning that we do in our daily lives. 
 
We can evaluate the truth of compound statements by using truth tables and the 
definitions of the five logical operators. So why do we need natural deduction then? 
Well, it can give us insights that pure mechanical computations with truth tables can not 
[51]: “... while truth tables are relatively automatic and mechanical, natural deduction 
requires insight and creativity.”. 
 
Natural deduction is a set of    inference rules, i.e.,   rules of implication and    
rules of replacement. 
 
Rules of implication: 
Modus ponens 
            
(4.1) 
Modus tollens 
              
(4.2) 
Pure hypothetical syllogism 
                   
(4.3) 
Disjunctive syllogism 
(        )   
(4.4) 
Constructive dilemma 
                           
(4.5) 
Simplification 
        
(4.6) 
Conjunction 
            
(4.7) 
Addition 
        
(4.8) 
 
 
Rules of replacement: 
De Morgan‟s rules 
                 
                 
(4.9) 
Commutativity 
            
            
(4.10) 

--- PAGE 47 ---
Associativity 
                    
                    
(4.11) 
Distribution 
                        
                        
(4.12) 
Double negation 
      
(4.13) 
Transposition 
              
(4.14) 
Material implication 
             
(4.15) 
Material equivalence 
                  
                        
(4.16) 
Exportation 
                    
(4.17) 
Tautology 
      
      
(4.18) 
 
 
4.4 First-order logic 
 
The fundamental components in propositional logic are simple statements, which can be 
combined with five logical operators to produce compound statements, and then we can 
use truth tables or natural deduction to infer new true statements. In first-order logic, 
we use the same five logical operators and natural deduction, but the fundamental 
components are predicates instead of simple statements. A predicate attaches some 
information to a subject in a statement. 
 
We can make three different kinds of statements with predicates: singular, 
particular, and universal. A singular statement makes an assertion about an individual 
object. A particular statement makes an assertion about one or more unnamed members 
of its subject class. A universal statement makes an assertion about every member of its 
subject class. 
 
For example, “Stefan Stavrev is a researcher” is a singular statement which can be 
written as      . The subject “Stefan Stavrev” is denoted by small letters “  ”. The 
predicate “is a researcher” is denoted by a capital letter “ ”. 

--- PAGE 48 ---
 
To make particular statements we use the existential quantifier “there exists” 
which is denoted by the symbol “ ”. For example, to say “Some A are B”, we write: 
               . 
 
Finally, to make universal statements we use the universal quantifier “for all” 
which is denoted by the symbol “ ”. For example, to say “All A are B”, we write 
               . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 49 ---
Chapter 5: Set theory 
 
A set is a collection/class of objects [60]: “This concept [set] formalizes the idea of 
grouping objects together and viewing them as a single entity.”. The objects are called 
elements/members of the set. The terms “set” and “element”, and the relation of set 
membership  , are not defined formally. Instead of formal definitions, we rely on our 
intuitive notions and we use them as primitives. The situation is similar to geometry, 
where we don‟t define points and lines formally, instead we describe what can be done 
with such objects and we use them as primitives. Then we add axioms to our theory and 
based on those axioms and the primitives, we derive theorems. In set theory there are 
two atomic types of statements: set membership    , and sets equality    . All 
other statements in set theory are combinations of such atomic statements, expressed in 
the language of first-order logic. 
 
 
5.1 Set theory as foundation for all mathematics 
 
Set theory is a foundation for all mathematical fields, i.e., in principle, any mathematical 
field can be reduced to set theory [113]: “The language of set theory can be used in the 
definitions of nearly all mathematical objects.”.  
 
 
5.2 Extensional and intensional set definitions 
 
Sets can be defined in two ways: by extension or by intension. A definition by extension 
explicitly lists all the members of the set, for example          . A definition by 
intension specifies a property/condition/predicate that each particular object   must 
satisfy in order to be a member of the set, for example                , where   is 
the set of all odd natural numbers. An interesting case of intensional definition is the 
empty set. One way to define the empty set is          . This set does not contain 
any elements, because no element satisfies the condition that it is different from itself. 

--- PAGE 50 ---
5.3 Set operations 
 
Union 
                  
(5.1) 
Intersection 
                  
(5.2) 
Complement 
                
(5.3) 
Difference 
                 
(5.4) 
Symmetric difference 
                            
(5.5) 
 
 
5.4 Set visualization with Venn diagrams 
 
Venn diagrams are very useful for visual representations of sets and set operations. The 
universal set   is represented as a rectangle, and all other sets are represented as closed 
shapes. 
 
 
Figure 5.1 Venn diagram. 
 
 
Venn diagrams can help us gain insight into theorems of set theory, but they are 
not used in formal proofs of theorems. Instead, we use first-order logic. For example, 
this is how we prove         : 
 
                                       
(5.6) 
 

--- PAGE 51 ---
5.5 Set membership vs. subsets 
 
We say that   is a subset of   when               and we write that as    . We 
say that   is a proper subset of   when                       and we write 
that as    . Saying that   is subset of   (i.e.,    ) is different from saying that   is 
member of   (i.e.,    ). The subset relation   is reflexive because    , but set 
membership is not reflexive    . Also, the subset relation   is transitive, while set 
membership is not: this is true                  , but this is not true: 
                 . 
 
 
5.6 Russell’s paradox 
 
Let           be the set of all sets that don‟t contain themselves. Now we ask the 
question: is    ? There are two possibilities, either     or    . Let‟s try the first 
possibility and assume that     and let‟s see what consequences follow from our 
assumption. It follows that           which implies that    . A contradiction! 
Now let‟s try the second possibility and assume that    . It follows that           
which implies that    . A contradiction again! This is a paradox because neither of the 
two exhaustive possibilities is true. It was discovered by Bertrand Russell in 1901. 
 
Russell‟s paradox is present in naive set theory which relies on the 
comprehension principle: for any given property there exists a set which contains all the 
objects that have that property. In the previous paragraph we proved that this principle 
is false, and therefore naive set theory is flawed. To resolve this issue and to construct a 
consistent system, we reject the comprehension principle and we use an alternative set 
of axioms. The most well known consistent axiomatic framework for set theory is ZFC 
set theory, i.e., Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice [54]. 
 
To summarize, by rejecting the comprehension principle we have basically 
accepted that for some linguistically expressed properties there won‟t be corresponding 
sets. In other words [40]: “The moral is that it is impossible, especially in mathematics, 
to get something from nothing. To specify a set, it is not enough to pronounce some 

--- PAGE 52 ---
magic words. It is necessary also to have at hand a set to whose elements the magic 
words apply.”. 
 
 
5.7 Theorems of ZFC set theory 
 
Idempotent laws: 
 
      
(5.7) 
      
(5.8) 
 
 
Associativity: 
 
                
(5.9) 
                
(5.10) 
 
 
Commutativity: 
 
        
(5.11) 
        
(5.12) 
 
 
Distributive laws: 
 
                    
(5.13) 
                    
(5.14) 
 
 
Identity: 
 
      
(5.15) 
      
(5.16) 
      
(5.17) 
      
(5.18) 
 
 
Double complement: 
 
        
(5.19) 
 
 

--- PAGE 53 ---
Complement: 
 
       
(5.20) 
     
(5.21) 
       
(5.22) 
     
(5.23) 
 
 
De Morgan’s laws: 
 
             
(5.24) 
             
(5.25) 
 
De Morgan‟s laws are consequence of a general principle in set theory called the 
principle of duality which states: for a given theorem, if each set is replaced with its 
complement, and union operations are replaced with intersection operations, and also 
intersection operations are replaced with union operations, then the result is a new 
theorem. 
 
Difference: 
         
(5.26) 
          
(5.27) 
           
(5.28) 
            
(5.29) 
            
(5.30) 
 
 
5.8 Counting number of elements in sets 
 
If two sets   and   are disjoint, then the total number of elements in both is: 
 
                 
(5.31) 
 
but if they are not disjoint then: 

--- PAGE 54 ---
 
                        
(5.32) 
 
 
 
The number of elements in the complement of   is the difference between the 
total number of elements in the universal set and the number of elements in  : 
 
                
(5.33) 
 
 
The number of elements in the difference     is the number of elements in   
minus the number of common elements between   and  : 
 
                   
(5.34) 
 
The power set of a set   is the set of all subsets of  , and the number of elements in it is: 
 
 (    )       
(5.35) 
 
 
5.9 Ordered collections 
 
An ordered pair       can be defined in terms of sets as: 
 
                  
(5.36) 
 
but we have to be aware that there are “freak” consequences from this definition, which 
are not intrinsic properties of the concept of ordered pair. One such consequence is: 
 
            
(5.37) 
 
 
Instead of defining formally what an ordered pair is, we can use it as a primitive 
supplemented with some axioms for its behavior. So there are two options: 1) define 

--- PAGE 55 ---
ordered pairs in terms of sets and ignore few “freak” consequences, or 2) use the 
intuitive concept of an ordered pair as a primitive and add few axioms. 
 
In general, an ordered collection of   elements is called an n-tuple, and we define 
it by using the same approach as for ordered pairs. For example, let             be a 
tuple of     elements.   can be defined as the set: 
 
                                
(5.38) 
 
i.e., for the first element   there is a set of   element    , for the second element   there 
is a set of   elements which contains the first and the second element, for the third 
element   there is a set of   elements which contains the first, the second and the third 
element, and so on. This way   is uniquely defined in terms of sets. Tuples are different 
from sets, because tuples are ordered and their elements can repeat. 
 
 
5.10 Relations 
 
A binary relation is defined as a set of ordered pairs: 
 
              
(5.39) 
 
and the domain and range of a relation are defined as: 
 
                      
(5.40) 
                       
(5.41) 
 
Properties of relations: 
reflexive 
            
(5.42) 
symmetric 
                      
(5.43) 
transitive 
                              
(5.44) 
 

--- PAGE 56 ---
5.11 Functions 
 
A function       from set   to set   is a rule which assigns exactly one element from 
  to each element from  . The set   is called the domain of  , and the range of   is the 
subset of   which contains all the images        of the elements from  . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 57 ---
Chapter 6: Abstract algebra 
 
Abstract algebra is the study of algebraic structures (e.g., groups, rings, fields, vector 
spaces, algebras). An algebraic structure consists of a set of objects and a set of 
operations on those objects. In general, an operation is a combination of elements from 
the set which results in another element from the set. Algebraic structures are 
categorized based on the properties of their operations. 
 
So why do we need abstract algebra? Well, it enables us to prove theorems at a 
more abstract and general level, which are true for many specific algebraic structures. 
 
 
6.1 Binary operations 
 
 
A binary operation maps two input objects to one output object. Operations are 
key components in many algebraic structures and that is why we are interested in their 
properties. I will mention some properties for arbitrary binary operations   and  : 
 
Closure: 
                
(6.1) 
Associative: 
                            
(6.2) 
Identity element: 
                        
(6.3) 
Inverse element: 
                               
(6.4) 
Commutative: 
                  
(6.5) 
Left distributive: 
                                
(6.6) 
Right distributive: 
                                
(6.7) 
 
 
6.2 Groups 
 
Definition 6.1: A group       has one set   and one binary operation   which satisfies 
these axioms: 
 closure (formula 6.1) 

--- PAGE 58 ---
 associative (formula 6.2) 
 identity element (formula 6.3) 
 inverse element (formula 6.4). 
 
 
Every group has exactly one identity element    . Each element     has 
exactly one inverse element      . 
 
If the operation   is commutative (formula 6.5), then the group is called 
commutative or Abelian. 
 
 
6.3 Rings 
 
Definition 6.2: A ring         has one set   and two binary operations   and   which 
satisfy these axioms: 
       is a commutative group 
       is a monoid: 
o closure (formula 6.1) 
o associative (formula 6.2) 
o identity element (formula 6.3) 
 Multiplication   is distributive with respect to addition   (formulas 6.6 and 6.7). 
 
 
6.4 Fields 
 
Definition 6.3: A field         has one set   and two binary operations   and   which 
satisfy these axioms: 
   and   are associative (formula 6.2) 
   and   are commutative (formula 6.5) 
 there are two different elements       which are additive and multiplicative 
identity elements respectively (formula 6.3) 

--- PAGE 59 ---
 additive inverse (formula 6.4) 
 multiplicative inverse for every element       (formula 6.4) 
 * is distributive with respect to + (formulas 6.6 and 6.7). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 60 ---
 Chapter 7: Combinatorial analysis 
 
Combinatorial analysis is [16]: “The branch of mathematics devoted to the solution of 
problems of choosing and arranging the elements of certain (usually finite) sets in 
accordance with prescribed rules. Each such rule defines a method of constructing some 
configuration of elements of the given set, called a combinatorial configuration. One can 
therefore say that the aim of combinatorial analysis is the study of combinatorial 
configurations. 
The 
simplest 
examples 
of 
combinatorial 
configurations 
are 
permutations, combinations and arrangements.”. So why do we need combinatorial 
analysis in machine learning? Well, combinatorial analysis gives us mathematical tools 
for counting numbers of possibilities from which we can construct probabilities. 
 
 
7.1 The basic principle of counting 
 
The basic principle of counting states that: if two experiments   and   are performed, 
and if   can result in one of   possible outcomes, and for each outcome of   there are   
possible outcomes of  , then there are     total possible outcomes of   and  . This 
principle can be generalized to any finite number of experiments each having finitely 
many possible outcomes. 
 
 
7.2 Permutations 
 
There are    permutations of   objects. If   different objects repeat         times, then 
there are: 
 
  
          
(7.1) 
 
different permutations. 

--- PAGE 61 ---
7.3 Combinations 
 
The number of subsets of size   chosen from a set of   objects is: 
 
( 
 ) 
  
          
(7.2) 
 
When     or    , then ( 
 )  . The values ( 
 ) are called binomial coefficients 
because they are components of the binomial theorem: 
 
       ∑( 
 )
 
   
       
(7.3) 
 
The generalization of the binomial theorem is the multinomial theorem: 
 
           
∑
(
 
       
)  
     
  
              
 
(7.4) 
 
where (
 
       ) 
  
          is a multinomial coefficient, i.e., the number of possible 
divisions of   distinct objects into   groups of sizes        . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 62 ---
Chapter 8: Probability theory 
 
 
8.1 Basic definitions 
 
The set of all possible outcomes of an experiment   is called the sample space   of the 
experiment. An event is a subset of the sample space. We can apply set operations to 
events such as: union, intersection and complement. Venn diagrams are a useful 
visualization tool. 
 
Definition 8.1 Conditional probability        is the probability that   is true, given 
that   is true: 
 
             
    
 
(8.1) 
 
Definition 8.2 Events   and   are independent iff: 
 
                                         
(8.2) 
 
            
(8.3) 
 
            
(8.4) 
 
Definition 8.3 The odds of an event   is the ratio: 
 
            
      
    
       
(8.5) 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 63 ---
8.2 Kolmogorov’s axioms 
 
Probability theory can be reduced to (i.e., derived from) Kolmogorov‟s three axioms 
which match our intuitive notion of probability [104]: 
 
1)          
(8.6) 
2)        where   is the sample space 
(8.7) 
3)   ⋃  
 
  ∑     
 
 for mutually exclusive events     
(8.8) 
 
 
8.3 Theorems 
 
Theorem 8.1: 
            . 
 
Proof 8.1: 
                           
               
 
Theorem 8.2: 
            . 
 
Proof 8.2: 
                      
               
 
Theorem 8.3: 
             . 
 
Proof 8.3: 
                              

--- PAGE 64 ---
Theorem 8.4: 
                        when      . 
 
Theorem 8.5 The chain rule: 
                                                   . 
 
Theorem 8.6 The law of total probability: 
 
     ∑
       
 
   
 ∑
       
 
   
      
 
Theorem 8.7 Bayes‟ theorem: 
 
                 
    
 
          
∑
       
 
   
      
 
Proof 8.7: 
 
                              
                        
                  
    
 
          
∑
       
 
   
       
 
 
8.4 Interpretations of probability 
 
We have defined formally what a probability is with Kolmogorov‟s axioms, but which 
informal concept or interpretation do we attach to this formalism? I will discuss the 
three main interpretations of probability. 
 
According to the classical interpretation [112]: “If a random experiment can 
result in   mutually exclusive and equally likely outcomes and if    of these outcomes 

--- PAGE 65 ---
result in the occurrence of event  , the probability is defined by:      
  
 ”. This 
interpretation has two limitations, i.e., it is applicable only if: 1) the number of possible 
outcomes is finite, and 2) all the possible outcomes are equally likely. 
 
Another interpretation of probability is called frequentism [112]: “If we denote by 
   the number of occurrences of an event   in   trials, then if       
  
    we say that 
      .”. One obvious problem with this interpretation is that we can‟t repeat an 
experiment infinitely many times. Also, this probability depends on the number of times 
we repeat the experiment, and so      will vary for different number of trials  . At best, 
we can try to approximate the ideal of infinite repetitions of the experiment with finitely 
many repetitions, enough to get a good approximation for     . 
 
Finally, the third interpretation which I will mention is called subjectivism, 
according to which a probability is a measure of the “degree of belief” of an agent. The 
agent makes a conclusion based on evidence and assigns a degree of belief to his 
conclusion. 
 
All three kinds of probabilities can be used in the same probability calculus based 
on Kolmogorov‟s axioms. 
 
 
8.5 Random variables 
 
A random variable is a function that maps a set of possible outcomes to probabilities. 
There are two types of random variables: discrete and continuous. A discrete random 
variable has a finite or countably infinite set of possible outcomes, and its probability 
distribution is described by a probability mass function. A continuous random variable 
has a continuous range of possible values/outcomes, and its probability distribution is 
described by a probability density function. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 66 ---
8.5.1 Expected value 
 
Expected value of a random variable is a concept that is analogous to the physical 
concept of center of gravity of a physical body. For discrete random variables the 
expected value is defined as a sum, and for continuous random variables it is defined as 
an integral: 
 
 [ ] ∑  
 
   
         
(8.9) 
 
 [ ] ∫  
 
  
        
(8.10) 
 
 
8.5.2 Variance and standard deviation 
 
Besides the expected value, we also want to know how much the values deviate from the 
expected value. For this purpose, we define the variance: 
 
        [      ] ∑      
 
     ∑           
 
    
 ∑      
 
   ∑     
 
   ∑    
 
  [  ]       
  [  ]     [  ]   [ ]   
(8.11) 
 
and the standard deviation is defined as the square root of the variance: 
 
       √       
(8.12) 
 
 

--- PAGE 67 ---
 
 
 
Part 3: General theory of machine learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 68 ---
 
 
 
Part 4: Machine learning algorithms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 69 ---
Chapter 9: Classification 
 
Informal functional description: 
The general classification function is a mapping between one or more input variables 
and one discrete (i.e., categorical) output variable. For a given space of objects described 
by the input variables, such a function can tell us to which class each object belongs. 
 
Formal functional description: 
A classification function       is a mapping between an input space   and a 
categorical variable  .   can be one-dimensional or multi-dimensional. Each value of   
represents one class (i.e., category). The input variables, i.e., the dimensions of the input 
space  , are denoted by:   ,   , ...,   . A particular object      is represented as a tuple 
of values                . The goal is to learn a classification function   from observed 
mappings between   and                     , such that,   generalizes well on the 
unobserved part of  . 
 
Classification branches: 
The general classification function can be divided in two more specific functions: binary 
classification (i.e., two output classes) and multiclass classification (i.e., more than two 
output classes). 
 
Performance measures: 
I will describe five standard performance measures for binary classification: confusion 
matrix, accuracy, precision, recall, and    score. 
 
The confusion matrix for binary classification is a     matrix: 
 
 
predicted class =   
predicted class =   
actual class =   
# true negatives      
# false positives      
actual class =   
# false negatives      
# true positives      
 

--- PAGE 70 ---
where    for example, is the number of data points that are classified as class  , and 
their true class is also  . 
 
The next four performance measures are constructed from the components of the 
confusion matrix: 
 
                              
                 
 
     
            
(9.1) 
 
          
  
      
(9.2) 
 
       
  
      
(9.3) 
 
                          
                 
(9.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 71 ---
9.1 Logistic regression 
 
Logistic regression is a discriminative model, i.e., it directly models the relationship 
between the input space   and the categorical variable  , with a function that estimates 
the probability        from data. 
 
Function (binary classification): 
I will use a logistic regression model to learn a function for binary classification. I will 
refer to the two output classes as class   and class  . 
 
Model (logistic regression): 
Let   be a linear combination of the input variables: 
                                                                  
         
(9.5) 
 
where    is the intercept coefficient,             is a vector of coefficients for the input 
variables, and             is a data point described as a vector of values for the input 
variables. The values of   are in the range          . Positive values are interpreted 
as   belonging to class  , and negative values are interpreted as   belonging to class  . 
 
Next, we want to map the range of values           to the range      , so we 
can interpret such a value as the probability that   belongs to class  . For this purpose, 
we need a so called “link” function such that:             ,              , and 
            . It is called a link function because it links one range to another. We 
will use the inverse logit function            (i.e., the sigmoid S function) as a link 
function: 
 
                        (
 
   ) 
(9.6) 
 
             
  
     
 
      
(9.7) 

--- PAGE 72 ---
where   is the output value of the linear combination in (formula 9.5), and   is the 
corresponding probability for  . You can see the logit and the inverse logit functions in 
(figure 9.1). 
 
  
 
 
Figure 9.1 Logit and inverse logit (sigmoid S) functions. 
 
 
Evaluator (maximum likelihood): 
Now that we have defined a function (i.e., binary classification) and a model class (i.e., 
logistic regression), next we will define an evaluator which can tell us if a specific model 
   is better than another model   . For this purpose, we will use the following 
likelihood function as an evaluator: 
 
        ∏      
 
   
           ∏(
 
      )
  
 
   
   
 
           
 ∏(
 
             )
  
 
   
   
 
                   
(9.8) 
 

--- PAGE 73 ---
which is a product of probabilities, where   is the number of training data points,    is 
the estimated probability that the training data point    belongs to class  ,        is the 
estimated probability that    belongs to class  , and    is the true observed class of   . 
The likelihood function is a product of probabilities because we assume that the data 
points are i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed). 
 
All the possible values for    and   define the whole hypothesis space, and one 
particular tuple        defines one particular hypothesis. The goal now is to find “the 
best” hypothesis    
                        (i.e., the best particular logistic regression 
model). 
 
Optimization: 
To find the best hypothesis, we need to maximize the likelihood function         
(formula 9.8), i.e., we need to find the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) of the 
parameters    and  . For this purpose, first we will transform         from a product 
into a sum (formula 9.9) by using basic rules for logarithms, and then we will maximize 
this sum, so called log-likelihood function: 
 
       ∑                         
 
   
 
(9.9) 
 
Now let‟s find the parameters    
      which maximize the log-likelihood function       . 
First, I implement the sigmoid function and the negative log-likelihood function 
(pseudocode 9.1 and 9.2): 
 
Pseudocode 9.1 
def sigmoid(a): 
    return 1 / (1 + exp(-a)) 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 74 ---
Pseudocode 9.2 
def negative_log_likelihood(c, x, y): 
    a = c[0] + (c[1] * x) 
    p = sigmoid(a) 
    log_likelihood = sum(log(p[y==1])) + sum(log(1 - p[y==0])) 
    return -log_likelihood 
 
Next, I use the an optimizer to find    
     : 
 
Pseudocode 9.3 
start_params = [1, 1] 
coefficients = minimize(negative_log_likelihood, start_params, train_data) 
 
 
Classification: 
Finally, we can apply our learned model and classify previously unseen test data: 
 
Pseudocode 9.4 
a = coefficients[0] + (coefficients[1] * x_test) 
p = sigmoid(a) 
classify = lambda x: x > 0.5 
predictions = map(classify, p) 
 
You can see the final result in (figure 9.2). 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 75 ---
    
 
 
Figure 9.2 The first plot has     training data points, where red points belong to class   and 
blue points belong to class  . The second plot has    test data points which were classified with 
the learned logistic regression classifier. The sigmoid function represents the probability   that a 
data point belongs to class  . If       then the data point is classified as class  , otherwise it is 
classified as class  . That is why the decision boundary is at the value of   where the sigmoid 
function has value of    . 
 
 
The general idea behind logistic regression: 
In order to classify a data point   , we map it to a number            with a linear 
function                          . The model parameters are learned from 
training data, according to the maximum likelihood (MLE) criterion, by optimizer  . 
Then,    is mapped to          by a link function            , and    is interpreted as 
the probability that           . 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 76 ---
9.2 Gaussian naive Bayesian classifier 
 
Function (multiclass classification): 
The input variables    can be discrete or continuous. The output variable   is 
discrete/categorical and the number of categories is greater than two. Our goal here is to 
learn a classification function      . 
 
Model (Gaussian naive Bayesian model): 
We want to learn a model for        which can then be used for classification, such that, 
                          . According to Bayes‟ theorem,        can be expressed 
as: 
 
                 
    
 
(9.10) 
 
which is interpreted in the classification context as: 
 
                                               
             
 
(9.11) 
 
and more generally it can be interpreted as: 
 
                                                          
           
 
(9.12) 
 
The components in Bayes‟ theorem are referred to as: 
 
                          
        
 
(9.13) 
 
 
The likelihood        can be computationally intractable if the number of input 
variables leads to combinatorial explosion. In order to simplify the computation of the 

--- PAGE 77 ---
likelihood, we make an assumption that the input variables are conditionally 
independent given the class: 
 
                   
(9.14) 
 
which significantly reduces the number of parameters of the model. Although this 
assumption simplifies the model, it is not necessarily true, and that is why this model is 
called “naive”. Under this assumption, the likelihood can be expressed as: 
 
         ∏         
 
   
 
(9.15) 
 
This naive Bayesian model corresponds to the Bayesian network in (figure 9.3). The 
nodes in a Bayesian network represent variables, and the directed edges represent 
causal relationships or influences in general. The class variable   influences the input 
variables     , which are conditionally independent from each other given  , and that is 
why the input variables      are not connected in the network. This is a generative model 
because it can be used to generate new data, by first sampling the prior distribution 
    , followed by sampling the conditional distributions          . 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.3 Bayesian network for the naive Bayesian model. 
 

--- PAGE 78 ---
 
Next, we make an assumption that the probability distributions           are 
univariate Gaussians          
  . Each Gaussian is defined by two parameters: mean     
and variance    
 . We will see later how to learn these parameters from data. 
 
Evaluator (maximum a posteriori - MAP): 
For two particular Gaussian naive Bayesian models    and   , how do we decide which 
one is better given the observed data? A model    is better than another model   , if    
results in a larger posterior probability       . 
 
Optimization (Gaussian density estimation): 
We learn the “best” model by maximizing the posterior probability: 
 
                 
    
 
(9.10) 
 
We can exclude      because it is constant: 
 
                  
(9.16) 
 
so maximizing the posterior        is equivalent to maximizing the likelihood        
and the prior     . 
 
The prior      is very easy to compute. We simply count the number of data 
points in each class: 
 
                                    
                            
(9.17) 
 
 
The likelihood        is computed as a product of univariate Gaussians: 
 

--- PAGE 79 ---
         ∏         
 
   
 ∏          
 
   
           
   
(9.18) 
 
To compute the likelihood       , we need to estimate       univariate Gaussian 
distributions, one Gaussian for each pair       . Each Gaussian is defined by two 
parameters, mean     and variance    
 , so the total number of parameters is        . 
For example, if there are two input variables         and three output classes   
       , then we need to learn            parameters for   Gaussians. The MAP 
estimates for the Gaussian parameters are computed as follows: 
 
           
∑
  
 
 
   
       
∑
       
 
   
 
(9.19) 
 
              
  
∑
   
       
 
   
       
 ∑
       
 
   
   
 
(9.20) 
 
where   indexes the input variables     ,   indexes the output classes,   indexes the 
training data points, and   is an indicator function. 
 
Now that our model is defined mathematically, we can implement it in 
pseudocode. You can see the final visual result in (figure 9.4). 
 
First, we set the number of input variables   and the number of output classes   
(pseudocode 9.5). 
 
Pseudocode 9.5 
J = 2 # two input variables 
K = 3 # three output classes 
 
 
 
Now let‟s estimate the prior probability for each class  , given the observed 
training data (pseudocode 9.6). 

--- PAGE 80 ---
Pseudocode 9.6 
def learn_prior(data, K): 
    p = zeros(K) 
    for k in range(K): 
        p[k] = sum(data[:, -1] == k) / nrow(data) 
    return p 
learned_prior = learn_prior(train_data, 3) 
 
 
 
Next, we need to learn       univariate Gaussians, one Gaussian for each pair 
       of input variable    and class   (pseudocode 9.7). 
 
Pseudocode 9.7 
def learn_gaussians(train_data, J, K): 
    mean = zeros(J * K).reshape(J, K) 
    variance = zeros(J * K).reshape(J, K) 
    classes = train_data[:, -1] 
    for j in range(J): 
        for k in range(K): 
            mean[j, k] = sum(train_data[classes==k, j]) / sum(classes == k) 
            variance[j, k] = sum((train_data[classes==k, j] - mean[j, k])^2) / 
                (sum(classes == k) - 1) 
    return mean, variance 
 
learned_gaussians = learn_gaussians(train_data, J, K) 
gauss_mean = learned_gaussians[0]; gauss_variance = learned_gaussians[1] 
 

--- PAGE 81 ---
 
Next, we implement the likelihood function           which tells us how likely 
it is for class   to generate the data point    (pseudocode 9.8). 
 
Pseudocode 9.8 
def learn_likelihood(xi, k): 
    product_of_gaussians = 1 
    for j in range(J): 
        gaussian_ = norm.pdf(xi[j], gauss_mean[j,k], sqrt(gauss_variance[j,k])) 
        product_of_gaussians = product_of_gaussians * gaussian_ 
    return product_of_gaussians 
 
 
 
Finally, we implement the posterior probability function           which will 
assign probabilities to each class   for a given data point    (pseudocode 9.9). 
 
Pseudocode 9.9 
def learn_posterior(xi, K): 
    post = zeros(K) 
    for k in range(K): 
        post[k] = learned_prior[k] * learn_likelihood(xi, k) 
    return post 
 
 
Classification: 
To classify a particular data point   , first we compute the posterior probabilities for all 
the   classes, and then we select the class with the highest probability: 
 
                           
(9.21) 
 

--- PAGE 82 ---
The final result of applying the learned Gaussian naive Bayesian classifier can be seen in 
(figure 9.4). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.4 Gaussian naive Bayesian classifier. 
 
 
The general idea behind the Gaussian naive Bayesian classifier: 
The relationship between the input variables      and the output variable   is 
represented by the posterior probability       , such that, for a given data point    we 
assign the class      with the highest posterior probability             . The key 
question then is how to compute these posterior probabilities? 
 
By using Bayes‟ theorem, the posterior        is expressed in terms of: the 
likelihood       , the prior     , and the marginal     . Maximizing the posterior is 
equivalent to maximizing the product of the likelihood and the prior, because the 
marginal is constant and can be ignored. The prior is estimated from data by counting 
the number of data points in each class. The key component of the whole model is the 
likelihood, which can be expressed as a product, due to the conditional independence 
assumption. We assume that each component in that product is a univariate Gaussian, 
which is estimated from the training data. 

--- PAGE 83 ---
Chapter 10: Regression 
 
Informal functional description: 
The general regression function estimates the relationship between the input variables 
(also called independent variables, predictor variables, regressor variables, explanatory 
variables, etc.) and the output variables (also called dependent variables, predicted 
variables, regressand variables, explained variables, etc.). An input variable can be 
qualitative or quantitative. 
 
Formal functional description: 
A regression function is a mapping between input variables and output variables: 
                    . 
 
Regression branches: 
Regression is a broad area which can be divided in three branches based on the number 
of input and output variables: 
 
# input variables 
# output variables 
regression branch 
1 
1 
simple regression 
> 1 
1 
multiple univariate regression 
1 
> 1 
multivariate regression 
> 1 
> 1 
multiple multivariate regression 
 
 
I join multivariate regression and multiple multivariate regression in one branch, i.e., 
multivariate regression. So we have three branches: simple regression, multiple 
univariate regression, and multivariate regression. Next, each branch is divided in two 
sub-branches based on the type of the regression function: linear and non-linear. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 84 ---
Performance measures: 
A standard performance measure for simple linear regression is the root mean squared 
error (RMSE): 
 
     √ 
 ∑      ̂  
 
 
 
(10.1) 
 
This measure is relative and not absolute, i.e., it can be meaningfully interpreted only 
when comparing two different learned models, such that, the model with smaller RMSE 
is considered to be better. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 85 ---
10.1 Simple linear regression 
 
Function (simple linear regression): 
A simple linear regression function is a linear function of one input variable and one 
output variable. 
 
Model (line): 
We assume that the relationship between the input variable and the output variable is 
linear. Then, we want to know the type of the linear relationship. Positive linear 
relationship means that as the input variable increases, so does the output variable. 
Negative linear relationship means that as the input variable increases, the output 
variable decreases. Also, we want to know precisely how much the output variable 
changes as the input variable changes. 
 
We can use a linear correlation measure to find out if the relationship between 
the input variable and the output variable is linear, to what degree is it linear, and is it 
positive or negative. For example, we can use the Pearson correlation measure: 
 
  
∑
     ̅      ̅ 
 
   
√∑
     ̅       ̅  
 
   
 [    ] 
(10.2) 
 
where   is the number of data points,  ̅ is the average of the   values, and  ̅ is the 
average of the   values. The sign of   corresponds to the type of the linear relationship 
between   and  , i.e., positive or negative. The magnitude (i.e., the absolute value) of   
corresponds to the strength of the linear relationship, such that higher magnitude of   
corresponds to stronger linear relationship. If    ,   and   are not linearly related. 
 
 

--- PAGE 86 ---
 
 
Figure 10.1 Pearson correlation coefficient  . 
 
 
 
The model class for simple linear regression is a line (formula 10.3). The 
parameters    and    are learned from data. 
 
         
(10.3) 
 
Evaluator (ordinary least squares - OLS): 
Now that we have defined a model class (i.e., line), we need to find the best particular 
linear model according to the ordinary least squares (OLS) criterion: 
 
   
    
         ∑      ̂  
 
   
       ∑               
 
   
 
(10.4) 
 
where    are the true observed values and   ̂ are our predicted values. The differences 
      ̂  are called residuals (i.e., errors). We square them in order to achieve two goals: 
1) to get positive values so that it does not matter on which side of the line the data point 
lies, and 2) to emphasize larger errors. 
 
Optimization (analytical solution of OLS): 
Iterative optimization algorithms can be used (e.g., gradient descent), but in this case an 
analytical solution is available for (formula 10.4). 

--- PAGE 87 ---
 
I will only sketch the optimization process here. First we find the partial 
derivatives of (formula 10.4) with respect to the two parameters    and   . Then we set 
those derivatives to  , and finally we solve for    and   : 
 
   ∑     ̅      ̅ 
∑     ̅  
    
  
 
(10.5) 
 
    ̅    ̅ 
(10.6) 
 
where   is the Pearson correlation coefficient (formula 10.2), and    and    are the 
standard deviations for   and  : 
 
   √∑    ̅  
   
 
(10.7) 
 
You can see in (formula 10.5) how the correlation coefficient   is related to the slope 
coefficient   . They carry different information, i.e.,   tells you how close   and   are to a 
perfect linear relationship, and    tells you how much   will change if you increase   by 
  unit. 
 
Finally, we can implement a simple linear regression learner in (pseudocode 
10.1). You can see the final visual result in (figure 10.2). 
 
Pseudocode 10.1 
mx = mean(x) 
my = mean(y) 
c1 = sum((x - mx) * (y - my)) / sum((x - mx)^2) 
c0 = my – (c1 * mx) 
 
 

--- PAGE 88 ---
 
Figure 10.2 Simple linear regression. 
 
 
The general idea behind simple linear regression: 
First we make an assumption about the form of the relationship between   and  , i.e., 
we assume a linear relationship. Then we find the best particular linear model that 
minimizes the squared differences between the true values and the predicted values. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 89 ---
Chapter 11: Clustering 
 
Informal functional description: 
The general clustering function takes as input a set of objects, and it outputs a set of 
clusters and cluster memberships for each object. Clustering is an area in unsupervised 
machine learning where the goal is to discover structure in data without guidance on 
what to search for, unlike supervised machine learning where guidance is provided in 
the form of labels in the training data. We want to know if the initial population can be 
split into sub-populations and how these sub-populations relate to each other. 
 
Formal functional description: 
A clustering function is a mapping between input objects      and output clusters     . 
In general, one input object    can belong to zero or more clusters             with 
corresponding degrees of membership              . 
 
Clustering branches: 
Clustering is a broad area which can be divided into more branches and sub-branches: 
 
 flat or hierarchical clustering 
 hard or soft clustering 
 
In flat clustering there is only one level of clusters, while in hierarchical clustering we 
can keep dividing clusters into more clusters. In hard clustering, a data point either 
belongs to a cluster or it does not, while in soft clustering a data point can belong to a 
cluster to a certain degree. 
 
Performance measures: 
There are intrinsic and extrinsic performance measures for clustering results. An 
extrinsic measure tells us how good the clustering result is relative to some context (e.g., 
another problem that uses the clustering result and provides basis for interpretation of 
the clustering result). An intrinsic measure tells us how good the clustering result is by 

--- PAGE 90 ---
itself, independent from external entities. Standard intrinsic measures are intra-cluster 
similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity. Intra-cluster similarity measures how similar 
are the data points inside each cluster, while inter-cluster dissimilarity measures how 
dissimilar are the data points from different clusters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 91 ---
11.1 K-means clustering 
 
Function (hard flat clustering): 
The input is a set of data points      and the number of clusters   to find in the data. The 
output for a given input data point    is the cluster it belongs to. 
 
Model (centroid-based): 
In centroid-based models, a cluster is represented by a data point called a centroid 
which is in the same space as the input data points. A data point    belongs to the cluster 
with the most similar centroid. We will use Euclidean distance to measure similarity 
between two data points: 
 
       √∑        
 
   
 
(11.1) 
 
Evaluator (sum of squared residuals - SSR): 
The evaluator, i.e., the objective function that we want to minimize is the sum of 
squared residuals, where the residuals are Euclidean distances between data points and 
their cluster centroids: 
 
∑
∑
 (  
             )
        
   
 
   
 
(11.2) 
 
where   is the number of clusters,          is the number of data points in cluster  ,   
  
is the bth data point in cluster  , and            is the centroid of cluster  . 
 
Optimization (k-means iterative algorithm): 
To minimize (formula 11.2) we will use an iterative algorithm called k-means. It 
converges to a local minimum, relative to the initial centroid points it starts with. We 

--- PAGE 92 ---
can run the algorithm more times with different initial centroid points, and then we can 
pick the best solution. 
 
The algorithm is very simple. First, we choose initial centroid data points. For 
example, we can choose random distinct   data points from our data. Then, two main 
steps are repeated until convergence. In the first step, we associate each data point    
with its closest cluster centroid. In the second step, we recompute each cluster centroid 
as the average of its data points. The algorithm stops when there are no more changes to 
the cluster centroids. K-means clustering is implemented in (pseudocode 11.1) and the 
final visual result can be seen in (figure 11.1). 
 
Pseudocode 11.1 
def k_means(X, K): 
    nrow = nrow(X); ncol = ncol(X) 
 
    initial_centroids = sample(nrow, K, replace=False) 
    centroids = X[initial_centroids] 
 
    centroids_old = zeros(K, ncol) 
    cluster_assignments = zeros(nrow) 
 
    while (centroids_old != centroids): 
        centroids_old = centroids 
 
        # compute distances between data points and centroids 
        dist_matrix = distance_matrix(X, centroids) 
 
        # step 1: find the closest centroid for each data point 
        for i in range(nrow): 

--- PAGE 93 ---
            closest_centroid = min_index(dist_matrix[i]) 
            cluster_assignments[i] = closest_centroid 
 
        # step 2: recompute centroids 
        for k in range(K): 
            centroids[k] = rows_mean(X[cluster_assignments == k]) 
 
    return (centroids, cluster_assignments) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.1 K-means clustering with    . 
 
 

--- PAGE 94 ---
The general idea behind k-means clustering: 
We start with a set of data points that we want to cluster, and a number of clusters   
that we want to find in the data. A cluster is represented by a data point in the same 
space as the input data points. The goal is to find clusters such that overall the data 
points have high intra-cluster similarity and high inter-cluster dissimilarity. Similarity 
between two data points can be measured in different ways (e.g., we used Euclidean 
distance). An iterative algorithm is used for optimization, which finds a local minimum 
relative to its starting point. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 95 ---
Chapter 12: Dimensionality reduction 
 
Informal functional description: 
The general dimensionality reduction function maps a set of variables to another 
smaller set of variables. Obviously, some of the initial information will be lost in this 
process, but we can try to minimize that loss and preserve a sufficient amount of the 
initial information. 
 
Formal functional description: 
A dimensionality reduction function is a mapping from a set of initial variables      to a 
smaller set of new variables    
    . 
 
Dimensionality reduction branches: 
The broad area of dimensionality reduction can be divided in two branches: feature 
selection and feature extraction. In feature selection, some of the initial variables are 
excluded if they don‟t satisfy certain criteria. In feature extraction, a smaller set of new 
variables    
     is constructed from the initial variables:   
           . Feature 
extraction can then be divided in two sub-branches based on the type of the function  : 
linear and non-linear feature extraction. 
 
Performance measures (context-dependent): 
The performance of a dimensionality reduction algorithm can be measured relative to 
other dimensionality reduction algorithms. Also, if a dimensionality reduction algorithm 
is a component of another problem (e.g., classification, regression, clustering), then its 
performance can be measured according to how much it contributes to the solution of 
that problem. In summary, performance is measured based on context. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 96 ---
12.1 Principal component analysis (PCA) 
 
Function (linear feature extraction): 
We learn a linear function   which maps the original variables to new variables: 
 
  
     ({  })               
(12.1) 
 
such that        , where   is the dimensionality of the original input space. 
 
Model (linear combination of the original variables): 
What do we learn with dimensionality reduction? Well, first let‟s revisit the previous 
machine learning functions that were discussed in this book. In classification, we learn a 
model which tells us the class of each data point. In regression, we learn a model that 
can produce numeric values for an output variable, given values for input variables. In 
clustering, we learn a model that groups data points into clusters based on similarity. 
Now to get back to our initial question, in dimensionality reduction we learn a new 
smaller set of variables which describe the data sufficiently well. More specifically, in 
feature extraction, we learn a function that maps the original variables to new variables. 
 
In this context, I use the term “model” to refer to the underlying principles and 
assumptions which define the form of the function  . In principal component analysis 
(PCA), the model is a linear combination of the original variables, i.e., each new variable 
is constructed as a linear combination of the original variables (formula 12.1). There are 
  new variables (same as the original space), but some are more important than others, 
so we can exclude the less important ones and we can reduce the dimensionality of the 
new space to        dimensions. The new variables form a new space where each 
variable corresponds to a coordinate axis that is orthogonal to all the other axes. 
 
Evaluator (variance of new variables): 
For each new variable   
    we learn the coefficients             in (formula 12.1) that 
maximize the variance of   
   . In other words, we want to preserve the maximum 
variance possible: 

--- PAGE 97 ---
               
                     
     
(12.2) 
 
where    is a vector of coefficients for the linear combination for the new variable   
   , 
and   is the whole dataset represented in terms of the original variables. 
 
It turns out that the “maximum variance” criterion is equivalent to the “minimum 
reconstruction error” criterion (i.e., minimizing the sum of the squared distances 
between the original data points and the projected data points). 
 
Optimization (eigen decomposition): 
The goal of the optimization process in PCA is to find “the best” coefficients of the linear 
combinations for constructing the new variables. This process can be described as eigen 
decomposition of the covariance matrix of the data, so essentially PCA is a linear algebra 
problem. The optimization process consists of the following steps: 
 
1) Normalize the initial variables: 
a) Center the data (subtract the data mean from each data point): 
 
  
        ̅ 
(12.3) 
 
 
b) Scale the data (divide the centered variables with their standard deviations): 
 
   
    
   
   
       
(12.4) 
 
 
2) Compute the covariance matrix of the normalized data. 
3) Compute the eigenvectors and the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix. 
4) Order the eigenvectors according to the eigenvalues in decreasing order. 
5) Choose the number of new dimensions and select the first      eigenvectors. 
6) Project the normalized data points onto the first      eigenvectors. 
 

--- PAGE 98 ---
 
The eigenvectors of the covariance matrix are the orthonormal axes of the new 
coordinate system of the data space. Once we compute the eigenvectors, we order them 
by decreasing eigenvalues, and we select the first      eigenvectors. An eigenvalue 
indicates how much variance is preserved by projecting the data on the corresponding 
eigenvector. The larger the eigenvalue, the larger the variance preserved. 
 
The implementation in (pseudocode 12.1) is very simple. I applied PCA to reduce 
the dimensionality of two-dimensional data to one dimension (figure 12.1). 
 
Pseudocode 12.1 
data_normal = normalize(data) # steps 1.a, 1.b 
w, v = eigen(covariance(data_ normal)) # steps 2, 3, 4 
pca_main_axis = v[:,0] # step 5 
projected_data = data_ normal * pca_main_axis # step 6 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.1 Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to reduce two-dimensional data to 
one-dimensional data. 

--- PAGE 99 ---
The general idea behind PCA: 
The new variables are constructed as linear combinations of the original variables. The 
coefficients of those linear combinations are learned from data by maximizing the 
variance of the new variables. Essentially, PCA rotates the coordinate system of the 
original data space. The new axes are ordered by importance (i.e., how much variance is 
preserved when the data is projected on them). The goal is to exclude as many of the 
new variables as possible, while preserving enough variance in the data. As we exclude 
more variables, our linear approximation of the data gets worse. So we have to find 
some middle ground, such that, a sufficient number of variables are excluded and a 
sufficient amount of variance is preserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 100 ---
Bibliography 
 
[1] Balaguer, Mark. Platonism and Anti-Platonism in Mathematics. 
[2] Barber, David. Bayesian Reasoning and Machine Learning. 
[3] Bennett, Jonathan. A Philosophical Guide to Conditionals. 
[4] Binmore, Ken. Game Theory: A Very Short Introduction. 
[5] Blei, Dave. Principal Component Analysis (PCA). 
[6] Booth, Wayne C. Colomb, Gregory G. Williams, Joseph M. The Craft of Research. 
[7] Bradley, Darren. A Critical Introduction to Formal Epistemology. 
[8] Brockman, John. This Idea Must Die. 
[9] Brockman, John. This Will Make You Smarter. 
[10] Brockman, John. What to Think About Machines that Think. 
[11] Brownlee, Jason. Machine Learning Mastery Blog. 
[12] Carnap, Rudolf. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science. 
[13] Carter, Matt. Minds and Computers. 
[14] Cheng, Eugenia. Mathematics, Morally. 
[15] Chrisman, Matthew. Philosophy for Everyone. 
[16] Combinatorial analysis. Encyclopedia of Mathematics. URL: 
http://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php?title=Combinatorial_analysis&o
ldid=35186 
[17] Conery, John S. Computation is Symbol Manipulation. 
[18] Craver, Carl and Tabery, James. Mechanisms in Science. The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = 
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/science-mechanisms/>. 
[19] Craver, Carl F. Explaining the Brain. 
[20] Davis, Philip J. Hersh, Reuben.  The Mathematical Experience. 
[21] Descartes, René. Discourse on the Method. 
[22] Devlin, Keith. Introduction to Mathematical Thinking. 
[23] Devlin, Keith. Mathematics Education for a New Era. 
[24] Devlin, Keith. The Language of Mathematics. 
[25] Devlin, Keith. The Math Gene. 

--- PAGE 101 ---
[26] Domingos, Pedro. A Few Useful Things to Know about Machine Learning. 
[27] Domingos, Pedro. The Master Algorithm. 
[28] Effingham, Nikk. An Introduction to Ontology. 
[29] Einstein, Albert. Induction and Deduction in Physics. 
[30] Floridi, Luciano. Information: A Very Short Introduction. 
[31] Gaukroger, Stephen. Objectivity: A Very Short Introduction. 
[32] Ghodsi, Ali. Dimensionality Reduction A Short Tutorial. 
[33] Giaquinto, Marcus. Visual Thinking in Mathematics. 
[34] Giordano, Frank. A First Course in Mathematical Modeling. 
[35] Goertzel, Ben. Engineering General Intelligence, Part 1. 
[36] Goldreich, Oded. On our duties as scientists. 
[37] Grayling, A. C. Russell: A Very Short Introduction. 
[38] Grayling, A. C. Wittgenstein: A Very Short Introduction. 
[39] Hadamard, Jacques. The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field. 
[40] Halmos, Paul R. Naive Set Theory. 
[41] Hamming, Richard W. A Stroke of Genius: Striving for Greatness in All You Do. 
[42] Hardy, G. H. A Mathematician‟s Apology. 
[43] Harnad, Stevan. Computation is just interpretable symbol manipulation: cognition 
isn‟t. 
[44] Hawking, Stephen. The Grand Design. 
[45] Herbert, Simon. The Sciences of the Artificial. 
[46] Hindley, Roger J. Seldin, Jonathan P. Lambda-Calculus and Combinators: An 
Introduction. 
[47] Hofstadter, Douglas. Gödel, Escher, Bach. 
[48] Holland, John H. Complexity: A Very Short Introduction. 
[49] Hornik, Kurt. Principal Component Analysis using R. 
[50] Horst, Steven. Beyond Reduction. 
[51] Hurley, Patrick J. A Concise Introduction to Logic. 
[52] Jaynes, E. T. Bretthorst, Larry G. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. 
[53] Jesseph, Douglas M. Berkeley‟s Philosophy of Mathematics. 
[54] Kapetosu. Definition: Russell's paradox. YouTube, 12 October 2017. 

--- PAGE 102 ---
[55] Kirk, Roger E. Statistics: An Introduction. 
[56] Korb, Kevin B. Machine Learning as Philosophy of Science. 
[57] Kuhn, Thomas. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 
[58] Lemos, Noah. An Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge. 
[59] Levin, Janet. Functionalism. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 
2016 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = 
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/entries/functionalism/>. 
[60] Lipschutz, Seymour. Schaum's Outline of Set Theory and Related Topics. 
[61] Lockhart, Paul. A Mathematician‟s Lament. 
[62] Matloff, Norman. The Art of R Programming. 
[63] McGrayne, Sharon Bertsch. The Theory That Would Not Die. 
[64] McInerny, D. Q. Being Logical. 
[65] Mitchell, Melanie. Complexity. 
[66] Mitchell, Tom. Generative and Discriminative Classifiers: Naive Bayes and Logistic 
Regression. 
[67] Mitchell, Tom. The Discipline of Machine Learning. 
[68] Mohri, Mehryar. Foundations of Machine Learning. 
[69] Morrison, Robert. The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning. 
[70] Mumford, Stephen. Causation: A Very Short Introduction. 
[71] Mumford, Stephen. Metaphysics: A Very Short Introduction. 
[72] Neuhauser, C. Estimating the Mean and Variance of a Normal Distribution. 
[73] Oaksford, Mike. Bayesian Rationality. 
[74] Okasha, Samir. Philosophy of Science: A Very Short Introduction. 
[75] Papineau, David. Philosophical Devices. 
[76] Peterson, Martin. An Introduction to Decision Theory. 
[77] Pinter, Charles C. A Book of Abstract Algebra (2nd edition). 
[78] Poincaré, Henri. Science and Method. 
[79] Pólya, George. How to solve it. 
[80] Pólya, George. Induction and Analogy in Mathematics. 
[81] Pólya, George. Patterns of Plausible Inference. 
[82] Popper, Karl. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. 
[83] Prince, Simon J. D. Computer Vision: Models, Learning, and Inference. 

--- PAGE 103 ---
[84] Pritchard, Duncan. What is this thing called Knowledge? 
[85] Rapaport, William. Philosophy of Computer Science. 
[86] Reid, Mark. Anatomy of a Learning Problem. 
[87] Russell, Bertrand. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. 
[88] Russell, Bertrand. Principles of Mathematics. 
[89] Russell, Bertrand. The Problems of Philosophy. 
[90] Sawyer, W. W. Prelude to Mathematics. 
[91] Shalev-Shwartz, Shai. Ben-David, Shai. Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms. 
[92] Shapiro, Stewart. Thinking about Mathematics: The Philosophy of Mathematics. 
[93] Shmueli, Galit. To Explain or to Predict? 
[94] Smith, Leonard. Chaos: A Very Short Introduction. 
[95] Smith, Lindsay. A tutorial on Principal Components Analysis. 
[96] Smith, Peter Godfrey. Theory and Reality. 
[97] Smith, Peter. An Introduction to Gödel‟s Theorems. 
[98] Sober, Elliott. The Multiple Realizability Argument against Reductionism. 
[99] Stone, James. Bayes‟s Rule: A Tutorial Introduction to Bayesian Analysis. 
[100] Suber, Peter. Formal Systems and Machines. 
[101] Tao, Terence. Solving Mathematical Problems. 
[102] Tao, Terence. What is Good Mathematics? 
[103] Tarski, Alfred. Introduction to Logic. 
[104] Taylor, Courtney. What Are Probability Axioms? ThoughtCo, Sep. 28, 2017, 
thoughtco.com/what-are-probability-axioms-3126567. 
[105] Thagard, Paul. Computational Philosophy of Science. 
[106] Thurston, William. On Proof and Progress in Mathematics. 
[107] VanderPlas, Jake. Python Data Science Handbook. 
[108] Westerhoff, Jan. Reality: A Very Short Introduction. 
[109] Whorf, Benjamin Lee. Language, Thought and Reality. 
[110] Wikipedia. Data. 
[111] Wikipedia. Natural language. 
[112] Wikipedia. Probability Interpretations. 
[113] Wikipedia. Set theory. 

--- PAGE 104 ---
[114] Wikipedia. Symbolic Communication. 

