--- PAGE 1 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
1/21
Handling imbalanced datasets in
machine learning
What should and should not be done when facing an
imbalanced classes problem?
Baptiste Rocca
Follow
Jan 27 · 15 min read
This post was co-written with Joseph Rocca.
Introduction
Suppose that you are working in a given company and you are asked to
create a model that, based on various measurements at your disposal,
predicts whether a product is defective or not. You decide to use your
favourite classifier, train it on the data and voila : you get a 96.2%
accuracy !  
Your boss is astonished and decides to use your model without any
further tests. A few weeks later he enters your office and underlines the

--- PAGE 2 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
2/21
uselessness of your model. Indeed, the model you created has not
found any defective product from the time it has been used in
production. 
After some investigations, you find out that there is only around 3.8%
of the product made by your company that are defective and your
model just always answers “not defective”, leading to a 96.2% accuracy.
The kind of “naive” results you obtained is due to the imbalanced
dataset you are working with. The goal of this article is to review the
different methods that can be used to tackle classification problems
with imbalanced classes.
Outline
First we will give an overview of different evaluation metrics that can
help to detect “naive behaviours”. We will then discuss a whole bunch
of methods consisting in reworking the dataset and show that these
methods can be misleading. Finally, we will show that reworking the
problem is, most of the time, the best way to proceed.
Some subsections indicated by a (∞) symbol contains more
mathematical details and can be skipped without impacting the overall
comprehension of this post. Notice also that in most of what follows, we
will consider two classes classification problems but reasoning can
easily be extended to multi-classes cases.
. . .
Detect a “naive behaviour”
In this first section, we would like to remind different ways to evaluate
a trained classifier in order to be sure to detect any kind of “naive
behaviour”. As we saw in the introduction’s example, accuracy, while
being an important and unavoidable metric, can be misleading and
therefore should be used cautiously and alongside other metrics. Let’s
see what other tools can then be used.
Confusion matrix, precision, recall and F1

--- PAGE 3 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
3/21
A good and yet simple metric that should always be used when dealing
with classification problem is the confusion matrix. This metric gives an
interesting overview of how well a model is doing. Thus, it is a great
starting point for any classification model evaluation. We summarise
most of the metrics that can be derived from the confusion matrix in
the following graphic
Let us give a short description of these metrics. The accuracy of the
model is basically the total number of correct predictions divided by
total number of predictions. The precision of a class define how
trustable is the result when the model answer that a point belongs to
that class. The recall of a class expresses how well the model is able to
detect that class. The F1 score of a class is given by the harmonic mean
of precision and recall (2×precision×recall / (precision + recall)), it
combines precision and recall of a class in one metric.
For a given class, the different combinations of recall and precision
have the following meanings :
The confusion matrix and the metrics that can be derived from it.

--- PAGE 4 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
4/21
high recall + high precision : the class is perfectly handled by the
model
low recall + high precision : the model can’t detect the class well
but is highly trustable when it does
high recall + low precision : the class is well detected but the
model also include points of other classes in it
low recall + low precision : the class is poorly handled by the
model
In our introductory example, we have the following confusion matrix
for 10000 products.
The accuracy is 96.2% as said earlier. The non defective class precision
is 96.2% and the defective class precision is not computable. The recall
of the non defective class is 1.0 which is perfect (all the non defective
products have been labelled as such). But the recall of the defective
class is 0.0 which is the worse case (no defective products were
•
•
•
•
The confusion matrix of our introductory example. Notice that the “defective” precision can’t be
computed.

--- PAGE 5 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
5/21
detected). Thus, we can conclude our model is not doing well for this
class. The F1 score is not computable for the defective products and is
0.981 for the non defective products. In this example, looking at the
confusion matrix could have led to re-think our model or our goal (as
we will see in the following sections). It could have prevented using a
useless model.
ROC and AUROC
Another interesting metric is the ROC curve (standing for Receiver
Operating Characteristic), defined with respect to a given class (that
we will denote C in the following).
Suppose that for a given point x, we have a model that outputs the
probability that this point belongs to C: P(C | x). Based on this
probability, we can define a decision rule that consists in saying that x
belongs to class C if and only if P(C | x)≥T, where T is a given threshold
defining our decision rule. If T=1, a point is labelled as belonging to C
only if the model is 100% confident it does. If T=0, every points are
labelled as belonging to C.
Each value of the threshold T generates a point (false positive, true
positive) and, then, the ROC curve is the curve described by the
ensemble of points generated when T varies from 1 to 0. This curve
starts at point (0,0), ends at point (1,1) and is increasing. A good
model will have a curve that increases quickly from 0 to 1 (meaning
that only a little precision has to be sacrificed to get a high recall).

--- PAGE 6 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
6/21
Based on the ROC curve, we can build another metric, easier to use, to
evaluate the model: the AUROC which is the Area Under the ROC
curve. AUROC acts a little bit as a scalar value that summarises the
entire ROC curve. As it can be seen, the AUROC tend towards 1.0 for
the best case and towards 0.5 for the worst case. 
Here again, a good AUROC score means that the model we are
evaluating does not sacrifice a lot of precision to get a good recall on
the observed class (often the minority class).
. . .
What really is the problem?
Before trying to tackle the problem, let’s try to better understand it. For
this, we are going to consider a very simple example that will allow us
both to review quickly some basic aspects of a two classes classification
and to better grasp the fundamental problem of imbalanced dataset.
This example will also be used in the following sections.
An imbalanced example
Let’s suppose that we have two classes: C0 and C1. Points from the class
C0 follow a one dimensional Gaussian distribution of mean 0 and
Illustration of possible ROC curves depending on the ehectiveness of the model. On the left, the model has to sacrifce a lot of precision to get a
high recall. On the right, the model is highly ehective: it can reach a high recall while keeping a high precision.

--- PAGE 7 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
7/21
variance 4. Points from the class C1 follow a one dimensional Gaussian
distribution of mean 2 and variance 1. Suppose also that in our
problem the class C0 represent 90% of the dataset (and, so, the class C1
represent the remaining 10%). In the following picture, we have
depicted a representative dataset containing 50 points along with the
theoretical distributions of both classes in the right proportions
In this example we can see that the curve of the C0 class is always
above the curve of the C1 class and, so, for any given point the
probability that this point was drawn from class C0 is always greater
than the probability it was drawn from class C1. Mathematically, using
basic Bayes rule, we can write
where we can clearly see the effect of the priors and how it can lead to a
situation where a class is always more likely than the other.
Illustration of our imbalanced example. Dotted lines represent the probability densities of each class independently. Solid lines also take into
account the proportions.

--- PAGE 8 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
8/21
All this implies that even from a perfect theoretical point of view we
know that if we had to train a classifier on these data, the accuracy of
the classifier would be maximal when always answering C0. So, if
the goal is to train a classifier to get the best possible accuracy then it
should not be seen as a problem but just as a fact: with these features,
the best we can do (in terms of accuracy) is to always answer C0. We
have to accept it.
About the separability
In the given example, we can observe that the two classes are not well
separable (they are not far apart from each other). However, we can
notice that facing an imbalanced dataset doesn’t necessarily mean that
the two classes are not well separable and, so, that the classifier can’t
do a pretty good job on the minority class. For example, consider that
we still have two classes C0 (90%) and C1 (10%). Data in C0 follow a
one dimensional Gaussian distribution of mean 0 and variance 4
whereas data in C1 follow a one dimensional Gaussian distribution of
mean 10 and variance 1. If we plot the data as before, we then have
In our Gaussian example, if the means are diherent enough with respect to the variances, even imbalanced classes can be well separable.

--- PAGE 9 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
9/21
Here we see that contrarily to the previous case the C0 curve is not
always above the C1 curve and, so, there are points that are more likely
to be drawn from class C1 than from class C0. In this case, the two
classes are separated enough to compensate the imbalance: a classifier
will not necessarily answer C0 all the time.
Theoretical minimal error probability (∞)
Finally, we should keep in mind that a classifier has a theoretical
minimal error probability. For a classifier of this kind (one feature, two
classes), we can mention that, graphically, the theoretical minimal
error probability is given by the area under the minimum of the two
curves.
We can recover this intuition mathematically. Indeed, from a
theoretical point of view, the best possible classifier will choose for
each point x the most likely of the two classes. It naturally implies that
for a given point x, the best theoretical error probability is given by the
less likely of these two classes
Illustration of the theoretical minimal error for diherent degree of separability of two classes.

--- PAGE 10 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
10/21
Then we can express the overall error probability
Which is the area under the min of the two curves represented above.
. . .
Reworking the dataset is not always
a solution
To begin, the very first possible reaction when facing an imbalanced
dataset is to consider that data are not representative of the reality: if
so, we assume that real data are almost balanced but that there is a
proportions bias (due to the gathering method, for example) in the
collected data. In this case, it is almost mandatory to try collecting
more representative data. 
Let’s see, now, what can be done when the dataset is imbalanced
because reality is so. In the the next two subsections we present some
methods that are often mentioned to tackle imbalanced classes and
that deal with the dataset itself. In particular, we discuss the risks
related to undersampling, oversampling and generating synthetic data
as well as the benefits of getting more features.
Undersampling, oversampling and generating
synthetic data
These methods are often presented as great ways to balance the dataset
before fitting a classifier on it. In a few words, these methods act on the
dataset as follows:
undersampling consists in sampling from the majority class in
order to keep only a part of these points
•

--- PAGE 11 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
11/21
oversampling consists in replicating some points from the minority
class in order to increase its cardinality
generating synthetic data consists in creating new synthetic points
from the minority class (see SMOTE method for example) to
increase its cardinality
All these approaches aim at rebalancing (partially or fully) the dataset.
But should we rebalance the dataset to have as much data of both
classes ? Or should the majority class stay the most represented ? If so,
in what proportions should we rebalance ?
When using a resampling method (for example to get as much data
from C0 than from C1), we show the wrong proportions of the two
classes to the classifier during the training. The classifier learned
•
•
Illustration of the ehect that diherent degrees of majority class undersampling have on the model
decisions.

--- PAGE 12 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
12/21
this way will then have a lower accuracy on the future real test data
than the classifier trained on the unchanged dataset. Indeed, the true
proportions of classes are important to know for classifying a new point
and that information has been lost when resampling the dataset.
So, if these methods have not to be completely rejected, they should be
used cautiously: it can lead to a relevant approach if new proportions
are chosen with purpose (we will see that in the next section), but it
can also be a nonsense to just rebalance the classes without any further
thoughts about the problem. To conclude this subsection, let’s say that
modifying the dataset with resampling-like methods is changing
the reality, so it requires to be careful and to have in mind what it
means for the outputted results of our classifier.
Getting additional features
We discussed in the previous subsection the fact that resampling the
training dataset (modifying the classes proportions) can be or not a
good idea depending on the real purpose of the classifier. We saw in
particular that if the two classes are imbalanced, not well separable and
that we target a classifier with the best possible accuracy, then getting a
classifier that always answer the same class is not necessarily a problem
but just a fact: there is nothing better to do with these variables.
However, it remains possible to obtain better results in terms of
accuracy by enriching the dataset with an additional feature (or more).
Let’s go back to our first example where classes were not well
separable: maybe can we find a new additional feature that can help
distinguish between the two classes and, so, improve the classifier
accuracy.

--- PAGE 13 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
13/21
Compared to the approaches mentioned in the previous subsection that
suggest to change the reality of data, this approach that consists in
enriching data with more information from the reality is a far better
idea when it is possible.
. . .
Reworking the problem is better
Up to now the conclusion is pretty disappointing: if the dataset is
representative of the true data, if we can’t get any additional feature
and if we target a classifier with the best possible accuracy, then a
“naive behaviour” (answering always the same class) is not necessarily
a problem and should just be accepted as a fact (if the naive behaviour
is not due to the limited capacity of the chosen classifier, of course).
So what if we are still unhappy with these results? In this case, it means
that, in one way or another, our problem is not well stated (otherwise
we should accept results as they are) and that we should rework it in
order to get more satisfying results. Let’s see an example.
Looking for additional features can help separate two classes that were not initially separable.

--- PAGE 14 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
14/21
Cost-based classification
The feeling that obtained results are not good can come from the fact
that the objective function was not well defined. Up to now, we have
assumed that we target a classifier with high accuracy, assuming at the
same time that both kinds of errors (“false positive” and “false
negative”) have the same cost. In our example it means we assumed
that predicting C0 when true label is C1 is as bad as predicting C1 when
true label is C0. Errors are then symmetric.
Let’s consider our introductory example with defective (C1) and not
defective (C0) products. In this case, we can imagine that not detecting
a defective product will cost more to the company (customer service
costs, possible juridical costs if dangerous defects, …) than wrongly
labelling a not defective product as defective (production cost lost).
Now, predicting C0 when true label is C1 is far worse than predicting
C1 when true label is C0. Errors are no longer symmetric.
Consider then more particularly that we have the following costs:
predicting C0 when true label is C1 costs P01
predicting C1 when true label is C0 costs P10 (with 0 < P10 <<
P01)
Then, we can redefine our objective function: we don’t target the best
accuracy anymore but we look for the lower prediction cost instead.
Theoretical minimal cost (∞)
From a theoretical point of view, we don’t want to minimise the error
probability defined above but the expected prediction cost given by
•
•

--- PAGE 15 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
15/21
where C(.) defines the classifier function. So, if we want to minimise
the expected prediction cost, the theoretical best classifier C(.)
minimises
or equivalently, dividing by the density of x, C(.) minimises
So, with this objective function, the best classifier from a theoretical
point of view will then be such that:
Notice that we recover the expression of the “classic” classifier (focus
on accuracy) when costs are equal.
Probability threshold
One first possible way to take into account the cost in our classifier is to
do it after the training. The idea is, first, to train a classifier the basic
way to output the following probabilities

--- PAGE 16 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
16/21
without assuming any costs. Then, the predicted class will be C0 if
and C1 otherwise.
Here, it doesn’t matter which classifier we are using as long as it
outputs the probability of each class for a given point. In our main
example, we can fit a Bayes classifier on our data and we can then
reweight the obtained probabilities to adjust the classifier with the
costs errors as described.
Classes reweight
The idea of class reweight is to take into account the asymmetry of cost
errors directly during the classifier training. Doing so, the outputted
probabilities for each class will already embed the cost error
Illustration of the probability threshold approach: the outputted probabilities are reweighted such that costs are taken into account in the fnal
decision rule.

--- PAGE 17 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
17/21
information and could then be used to define a classification rule with
a simple 0.5 threshold.
For some models (for example Neural Network classifiers), taking the
cost into account during the training can consist in adjusting the
objective function. We still want our classifier to output
but this time it is trained such as to minimise the following cost
function
For some other models (for example Bayes classifier), resampling
methods can be used to bias the classes proportions such that to enter
the cost error information inside the classes proportions. If we consider
the costs P01 and P10 (such that P01 > P10), we can either:
oversample the minority class by a factor P01/P10 (cardinality of
the minority class should be multiplied by P01/P10)
undersample the majority class by a factor P10/P01 (cardinality of
the majority class should be multiplied by P10/P01)
•
•

--- PAGE 18 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
18/21
. . .
Takeaways
The main takeaways of this article are:
whenever using a machine learning algorithm, evaluation metrics
for the model have to be chosen cautiously: we must use the
metrics that gives us the best overview of how well our model is
doing with regards to our goals
when dealing with an imbalanced dataset, if classes are not well
separable with the given variables and if our goal is to get the best
possible accuracy, the best classifier can be a “naive” one that
always answer the majority class
resampling methods can be used but have to be thought carefully:
they should not be used as stand alone solutions but have to be
coupled with a rework of the problem to serve a specific goal
reworking the problem itself is often the best way to tackle an
imbalanced classes problem: the classifier and the decision rule
•
•
•
•
Illustration of the class reweight approach: the majority class is undersampled with a proportion that is chosen carefully to introduce the cost
information directly inside the class proportions.

--- PAGE 19 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
19/21
have to be set with respect to a well chosen goal that can be, for
example, minimising a cost
We should notice that we have not discussed at all techniques like
“stratified sampling” that can be useful when batch training a classifier.
When facing an imbalanced classes problem, such techniques ensure
more stability during the training (by removing the proportions
variance inside batches).
Finally, let’s say that the main keyword of this article is “goal”. Knowing
exactly what you want to obtain will help overcome imbalanced dataset
problems and will ensure having the best possible results. Defining the
goal perfectly should always be the first thing to do and is the starting
point of any choice that have to be done in order to create a machine
learning model.
Thanks for reading!
. . .
Last article written with Joseph Rocca:
Understanding Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs)
 
Building, step by step, the reasoning that leads to
GANs.
towardsdatascience.com

--- PAGE 20 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
20/21

--- PAGE 21 ---
5/29/2019
Handling imbalanced datasets in machine learning – Towards Data Science
https://towardsdatascience.com/handling-imbalanced-datasets-in-machine-learning-7a0e84220f28
21/21

