--- PAGE 1 ---
Diving Deep Into Feedforward Neural Nets | 
Towards AI
Nothing but NumPy: Understanding & 
Creating Neural Networks with 
Computational Graphs from Scratch
Understanding new concepts can be hard, especially these days when 
there is an avalanche of resources with only cursory explanations for 
complex concepts. This blog is the result of a dearth of detailed 
walkthroughs on how to create neural networks in the form of 
computational graphs.
In this, and some following, blog posts, I will consolidate all that I have 
learned as a way to give back to the community and help new entrants. 
I will be creating common forms of neural networks all with the help of 
nothing but NumPy.
This blog post is divided into two parts, the first part will be 
understanding the basics of a neural network and the second part will 
comprise the code for implementing everything learned from the first part.
Rafay Khan
Follow
Jun 22 · 34 min read
. . .
Part Ⅰ: Understanding a Neural Network
Let’s dig in᫥
᫦
᫧
᫨
᫩
Neural networks are a model inspired by how the brain works. Similar 
to neurons in the brain, our ‘mathematical neurons’ are also, 
intuitively, connected to each other; they take inputs(dendrites), do 
some simple computation on them and produce outputs(axons).
The best way to learn something is to build it. Let’s start with a simple 
neural network and hand-solve it. This will give us an idea of how the 
computations flow through a neural network.

--- PAGE 2 ---
As in the figure above, most of the time you will see a neural network 
depicted in a similar way. But this succinct and simple looking picture 
hides a bit of the complexity. Let’s expand it out.
Now, let’s go over each node in our graph and see what it represents.
. . .
These nodes represent our inputs for our first and second features, x₁
and x₂, that define a single example we feed to the neural network, 
thus called “Input Layer”
Fig.1 Simple input-output only neural network
Fig.2 Expanded neural network
Fig 3. Inputs nodes x₁ and x₂

--- PAGE 3 ---
w₁ and w₂ represent our weight vectors (in some neural network 
literature it is denoted with the theta symbol, θ). Intuitively, these 
dictate how much influence each of the input features should have in 
computing the next node. If you are new to this, think of them as 
playing a similar role to the ‘slope’ or ‘gradient’ constant in a linear 
equation.
Weights are the main values our neural network has to “learn”. So 
initially, we will set them to random values and let the “learning 
algorithm” of our neural network decide the best weights that result in 
the correct outputs.
Why random initialization? More on this later.
This node represents a linear function. Simply, it takes all the inputs 
coming to it and creates a linear equation/combination out of them. ( By 
convention, it is understood that a linear combination of weights and 
inputs is part of each node, except for the input nodes in the input layer, 
thus this node is often omitted in figures, like in Fig.1. In this example, I’ll 
leave it in)
This σ node takes the input and passes it through the following 
function, called the sigmoid function(because of its S-shaped curve), 
also known as the logistic function:
Fig 4. Weights
Fig 5. Linear operation
Fig 6. output node

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sigmoid is one of the many “activations functions” used in neural 
networks. The job of an activation function is to change the input to a 
different range. For example, if z > 2 then, σ(z) ≈ 1 and similarly, if z 
< -2 then, σ(z) ≈ 0. So, the sigmoid function squashes the output 
range to (0, 1) (this ‘()’ notation implies exclusive boundaries; never 
completely outputs 0 or 1 as the function asymptotes, but reaches very 
close to boundary values)
In our above neural network since it is the last node, it performs 
the function of output. The predicted output is denoted by ŷ. (Note: 
in some neural network literature this is denoted by ‘h(θ)’, where ‘h’ is 
called the hypothesis i.e. this is the hypothesis of the neural network, a.k.a 
the output prediction, given parameter θ; where θ are weights of the 
neural networks)
. . .
Now that we know what each and everything represents let’s flex our 
muscles by computing each node by hand on some dummy data.
The data above represents an OR gate(output 1 if any input is 1). Each 
row of the table represents an ‘example’ we want our neural network to 
learn from. After learning from the given examples we want our neural 
network to perform the function of an OR gate; given the input 
features, x₁ and x₂, try to output the corresponding y(also called 
‘label’). I have also plotted the points on a 2-D plane so that it is easy 
to visualize(green crosses represent points where the output(y) is 1
and the red dot represents the point where the output is 0).
Fig 7. Sigmoid(Logistic) function
Fig 8. OR gate

--- PAGE 5 ---
This OR-gate data is particularly interesting, as it is linearly separable
i.e. we can draw a straight line to separate the green cross from the red 
dot.
We’ll shortly see how our simple neural network performs this task.
Data flows from left-to-right in our neural network. In technical terms, 
this process is called ‘forward propagation’; the computations from 
each node are forwarded to the next node, it is connected to.
Let’s go through all the computations our neural network will perform 
on the given the first example, x₁=0, and x₂=0. Also, we’ll initialize 
weights w₁ and w₂ to w₁=0.1 and w₂=0.6 (recall, these weights a 
have been randomly selected)
With our current weights, w₁= 0.1 and w₂ = 0.6, our network’s 
output is a bit far from where we’d like it to be. The predicted output, 
ŷ, should be ŷ≈0 for x₁=0 and x₂=0, right now its ŷ=0.5.
So, how does one tell a neural network how far it is from our desired 
output? In comes the Loss Function to the rescue.
Fig 9. Showing that the OR gate data is linearly separable
Fig 10. Forward propagation of the first example from OR table data

--- PAGE 6 ---
Loss Function
The Loss Function is a simple equation that tells us how far our neural 
network’s predicted output(ŷ) is from our desired output(y), for ONE 
example, only.
The derivative of the loss function dictates whether to increase or 
decrease weights. A positive derivative would mean decrease the weights 
and negative would mean increase the weights. The steeper the slope the 
more incorrect the prediction was.
The Loss function curve depicted in Figure 11 is an ideal version. In real-
world cases, the Loss function may not be so smooth, with some bumps 
and saddles points along the way to the minimum.
There are many different kinds of loss functions each essentially 
calculating the error between predicted output and desired output. 
Here we’ll use one of the simplest loss functions, the squared-error 
Loss function. Defined as follows:
Fig 11. Loss function visualized
Fig 12. Loss Function. Calculating error for a single example

--- PAGE 7 ---
Taking the square keeps everything nice and positive and the 
fraction (1/2) is there so that it cancels out when taking the 
derivative of the squared term (it is common among some machine 
learning practitioners to leave the fraction out).
Intuitively, the Squared Error Loss function helps us in minimizing the 
vertical distance between our predictor line(blue line) and actual data
(green dot). Behind the scenes, this predictor line is our z(linear 
function) node.
. . .
Now that we know the purpose of a Loss function let’s calculate the 
error in our current prediction ŷ=0.5, given y=0
as we can see the Loss is 0.125. Given this, we can now use the 
derivative of the Loss function to check whether we need to increase or 
decrease our weights.
This process is called backpropagation, as we’ll be doing the opposite 
of the forward phase. Instead of going from input to output we’ll track 
backward from output to input. Simply, backpropagation allows us to 
figure out how much of the Loss each part of the neural network was 
responsible for.
. . .
Fig 13. Visualization of the effect of the Loss function
Fig 14. Loss calculated for 1ˢᵗexample

--- PAGE 8 ---
To perform backpropagation we’ll employ the following technique: at 
each node, we only have our local gradient computed(partial derivatives 
of that node), then during backpropagation, as we are receiving 
numerical values of gradients from upstream, we take these and multiply 
with local gradients to pass them on to their respective connected nodes.
This is a generalization of the chain rule from calculus.
. . .
Since ŷ(predicted label) dictates our Loss and y(actual label) is 
constant, for a single example, we will take the partial derivative of Loss 
with respect to ŷ
Since the backpropagation steps can seem a bit complicated I’ll go over 
them step by step:
Fig 15. Gradient Flow
Fig 16. The partial derivative of Loss w.r.t ŷ

--- PAGE 9 ---
. . .
For the next calculation, we’ll need the derivative of the sigmoid 
function, since it forms the local gradient of the red node. Let’s derive 
that.
Fig 17.a. Backpropagation

--- PAGE 10 ---
Let’s use this in the next backward calculation
. . .
The backward computations should not propagate all the way to 
inputs as we don’t want to change our input data(i.e. red arrows 
should not go to green nodes). We only want to change the weights 
associated with inputs.
Fig18. The derivative of the Sigmoid function.
Fig 17.b. Backpropagation

--- PAGE 11 ---
Notice something weird? The derivatives to the Loss with respect to the 
weights,w₁ & w₂, are ZERO! We can’t increase or decrease the weights 
if their derivatives are zero. So then, how do we get our desired output 
in this instance if we can’t figure out how to adjust the weights? The 
key thing to note here is that the local gradients (∂z/∂w₁ and ∂z/∂w₂) 
are x₁ and x₂, both of which, in this example, happens to be zero (i.e. 
provide no information)
This brings us to the concept of bias.
. . .
Bias
Recall equation of a line from your high school days.
Fig 17.c. Backpropagation

--- PAGE 12 ---
Here b is the bias term. Intuitively, the bias tells us that all outputs 
computed with x(independent variable) should have an additive bias of 
b. So, when x=0(no information coming from the independent 
variable) the output should be biased to just b.
Note that without the bias term a line can only pass through the origin(0, 
0) and the only differentiating factor between lines would then be the 
gradient m.
. . .
So, using this new information let’s add another node to a neural 
network; the bias node. (In neural network literature, every layer, except 
Fig 19. Equation of a Line
Fig 20. Lines from origin

--- PAGE 13 ---
the input layer, is assumed to have a bias node, just like the linear node, 
so this node is also often omitted in figures.)
Now let’s do a forward propagation with the same example, x₁=0, 
x₂=0, y=0 and let’s set bias, b=0 (initial bias is always set to zero, 
rather than a random number), and let the backpropagation of Loss 
figure out the bias.
Well, the forward propagation with a bias of “b=0” didn’t change our 
output at all, but let’s do the backward propagation before we make 
our final judgment.
As before let’s go through backpropagation in a step by step manner.
Fig 21. Expanded neural network with a bias node
Fig 22. Forward propagation of the first example from OR table data with a bias unit

--- PAGE 14 ---
Fig 23.a. Backpropagation with bias
Fig 23.b. Backpropagation with bias

--- PAGE 15 ---
Hurrah! we just figured out how much to adjust the bias. Since the 
derivative of bias(∂L/∂b) is positive 0.125, we will need to adjust the 
bias by moving in the negative direction of the gradient(recall the 
curve of the Loss function from before). This is technically called 
gradient descent, as we are “descending” away from the sloping 
region to a flat region using the direction of the gradient. Let’s do that.
Now, that we’ve slightly adjusted the bias to b=-0.125, let’s test if 
we’ve done the right thing by doing a forward propagation and
checking the new Loss.
Fig 23.c. Backpropagation with bias
Fig 24. Calculated new bias using gradient descent

--- PAGE 16 ---
Now our predicted output is ŷ≈0.469(rounded to 3 decimal places), 
that’s a slight improvement from the previous 0.5 and Loss is down 
from 0.125 to around 0.109. This slight correction is something that 
the neural network has ‘learned’ just by comparing its predicted output 
with the desired output, y, and then moving in the direction opposite 
of the gradient. Pretty cool, right?
Now you may be wondering, this is only a small improvement from the 
previous result and how do we get to the minimum Loss. Two things 
come into play: a) how many iterations of ‘training’ we perform
(each training cycle is forward propagation followed by backward 
propagation and updating the weights through gradient descent). b)
the learning rate.
Learning rate??? What’s that? Let’s talk about it
. . .
Learning Rate
Recall, how we calculated the new bias, above, by moving in the 
direction opposite of the gradient(i.e. gradient descent).
Fig 25. Forward propagation with newly calculated bias
Fig 26. Loss after newly calculated bias

--- PAGE 17 ---
Notice that when we updated the bias we moved 1 step in the opposite 
direction of the gradient.
We could have moved 0.5, 0.9, 2, 3 or whatever fraction of steps we 
desired in the opposite direction of the gradient. This ‘number of steps’ 
is what we define as the learning rate, often denoted with α(alpha).
Learning rate defines how quickly we reach the minimum loss. Let’s 
visualize below what the learning rate is doing:
Fig 27. The equation for updating bias
Fig 28. The equation for updating bias showing step
Fig 29. The general equation for gradient descent
Fig 30. Visualizing the effect of learning rate.

--- PAGE 18 ---
As you can see with a lower learning rate(α=0.5) our descent along 
the curve is slower and we take many steps to reach the minimum 
point. On the other hand, with a higher learning rate(α=5) we take 
much bigger steps and reach the minimum point much faster.
The keen-eyed may have noticed that gradient descent steps(green 
arrows) keep getting smaller as we get closer and closer to the minimum, 
why is that? Recall, that the learning rate is being multiplied by the 
gradient at that point along the curve; as we descend away from sloping 
regions to flatter regions of the u-shaped curve, near the minimum point, 
the gradient keeps getting smaller and smaller, thus the steps also get 
smaller. Therefore, changing the learning rate during training is not 
necessary(some variations of gradient descent start with a high learning 
rate to descend quickly down the slope and then reduce it gradually, this is 
called “annealing the learning rate”)
So what’s the takeaway? Just set the learning rate as high possible and 
reach the optimum loss quickly. NO. Learning rate can be a double-
edged sword. Too high a learning rate and the parameters
(weights/biases) don’t reach the optimum instead start to diverge 
away from the optimum. To small a learning rate and the parameters 
take too long to converge to the optimum.
Small learning rate(α=5*10⁻¹⁰) resulting is numerous steps to reach 
the minimum point is self-explanatory; multiply gradient with a small 
number(α) results in a proportionally small step.
Large learning rate(α=50) causing gradient descent to diverge maybe 
confounding, but the answer is quite simple; note that at each step 
gradient descent approximates its path downward by moving in 
straight lines(green arrows in the figures), in short, it estimates its 
path downwards. When the learning rate is too high we force gradient 
descent to take larger steps. Larger steps tend to overestimate the path 
downwards and shoot past the minimum point, then to correct the bad 
estimate gradient descent tries to move towards the minimum point 
but again overshoots past the minimum due to the large learning rate. 
This cycle of continuous overestimates eventually cause the results to 
diverge(Loss after each training cycle increase, instead of decrease).
Fig 31. Visualizing the effect of very low vs. very high learning rate.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Learning rate is what’s called a hyper-parameter. Hyper-parameters 
are parameters that the neural network can’t essentially learn through 
backpropagation of gradients, they have to be hand-tuned according to 
the problem and its dataset, by the creator of the neural network 
model. (The choice of the Loss function, above, is also hyper-parameter)
In short, the goal is not the find the “perfect learning rate ” but instead 
a learning rate large enough so that the neural network trains 
successfully and efficiently without diverging.
. . .
So, far we’ve only used one example(x₁=0 and x₂=0) to adjust our 
weights and bias(actually, only our bias up till now╣
╤
╥) and that 
reduced the loss on one example from our entire dataset(OR gate 
table). But we have more than one example to learn from and we want 
to reduce our loss across all of them. Ideally, in one training 
iteration, we would like to reduce our loss across all the training 
examples. This is called Batch Gradient Descent(or full batch 
gradient descent), as we use the entire batch of training examples per 
training iteration to improve our weights and biases. (Others forms are 
mini-batch gradient descent, where we use a subset of the data set in 
each iteration and stochastic gradient descent, where we only use one 
example per training iteration as we’ve done so far).
A training iteration where the neural network goes through all the 
training examples is called an Epoch. If using mini-batches than an epoch 
would be complete after the neural network goes through all the mini-
batches, similarly for stochastic gradient descent where a batch is just one 
example.
Before we proceed further we need to define something called a Cost 
Function.
. . .
Cost Function
When we perform “batch gradient descent” we need to slightly change 
our Loss function to accommodate not just one example but all the 
examples in the batch. This adjusted Loss function is called the Cost 
Function.
Also, note that the curve of the Cost Function is similar to the curve of the 
Loss function(same U-Shape).
Instead of calculating the Loss on one example the cost function 
calculates average Loss across ALL the examples.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Intuitively, the Cost function is expanding out the capability of the Loss 
function. Recall, how the Loss function was helping to minimize the 
vertical distance between a single data point and the predictor line(z). 
The Cost function is helping to minimize the vertical distance
(Squared Error Loss) between multiple data points, concurrently.
During batch gradient descent we’ll use the derivative of the Cost 
function, instead of the Loss function, to guide our path to minimum 
cost across all examples. (In some neural network literature, the Cost 
Function is at times also represented with the letter ‘J’.)
Let’s take a look at how the derivative equation of the Cost function 
differs from the plain derivative of the Loss function.
Fig 32. Cost function
Fig 33. Visualization of the effect of the Cost function

--- PAGE 21 ---
The derivative of Cost Function
Taking the derivative of this Cost function, which takes vectors as 
inputs and sums them, can be a bit dicey. So, let’s start out on a simple 
example before we generalize the derivative.
Nothing new here in the calculation of the Cost. Just as expected the 
Cost, in the end, is the average of the Loss, but the implementation is 
now vectorized(we performed vectorized subtraction followed by 
element-wise exponentiation, called Hadamard exponentiation). Let’s 
derive the partial derivatives.
Fig 34. Cost function showing it takes input vectors
Fig 35. Calculation of Cost on a simple vectorized example

--- PAGE 22 ---
From this, we can generalize the partial derivative equation.
Fig 36. Calculation of Jacobian on the simple example
Fig 37. Generalized partial derivative equation

--- PAGE 23 ---
Right now we should take a moment to note how the derivative of the 
Loss is different for the derivative of the Cost.
We’ll later see how this small change manifests itself in the calculation 
of the gradient.
. . .
Back to batch gradient descent.
There are two ways to perform batch gradient descent:
1. For each training iteration create separate temporary variables
(capital deltas, Δ) that will accumulate the gradients(small deltas, δ) 
for the weights and biases from each of the “m” examples in our 
training set, then at the end of the iteration update the weights using 
the average of the accumulated gradients. This is a slow method. (for 
those familiar time complexity analysis you may notice that as the 
training data set grows this becomes a polynomial time algorithm, O(n²))
Fig 38. Comparison between the partial derivative of Loss and Cost with respect to(w.r.t) ŷ⁽ⁱ⁾

--- PAGE 24 ---
2. The quicker method is similar to above but instead uses vectorized 
computations to calculate all the gradients for all the training 
examples in one go, so the inner loop is removed. Vectorized 
computations run much quicker on computers. This is the method 
employed by all the popular neural network frameworks and the one 
we’ll follow for the rest of this blog.
For vectorized computations, we’ll make an adjustment to the “Z” node 
of the neural network computation graph and use the Cost function 
instead of the Loss function.
Fig 39. Batch Gradient Descent slow method

--- PAGE 25 ---
Note that in the figure above we take dot-product between W and X
which can be either an appropriate size matrix or vector. The bias, b, is 
still a single number(a scalar quantity) here and will be added to the 
output of the dot product in an element-wise fashion. The predicted 
output will not be just a number, but instead a vector, Ŷ , where each 
element is the predicted output of their respective example.
Let’s set up out data(X, W, b & Y) before doing forward and backward 
propagation.
Fig 40. Vectorized implementation of Z node

--- PAGE 26 ---
We are now finally ready to perform forward and backward 
propagation using Xₜᵣₐᵢₙ, Yₜᵣₐᵢₙ, W, and b.
(NOTE: all the results below are rounded to 3 decimal points, just for 
brevity)
Fig 41. Setup data for vectorized computations.

--- PAGE 27 ---
How cool is that we calculated all the forward propagation steps for all 
the examples in our data set in one go, just by vectorizing our 
computations.
We can now calculate the Cost on these output predictions. (We’ll go 
over the calculation in detail, to make sure there is no confusion)
Fig 42. Vectorized Forward Propagation on OR gate dataset

--- PAGE 28 ---
Our Cost with our current weights, W, turns out to be 0.089. Our Goal 
now is to reduce this cost using backpropagation and gradient descent. 
As before we’ll go through backpropagation in a step by step manner
Fig 43. Calculation of Cost on the OR gate data

--- PAGE 29 ---
Fig 44.a. Vectorized Backward on OR gate data

--- PAGE 30 ---
Fig 44.b. Vectorized Backward on OR gate data

--- PAGE 31 ---
Voila, we used a vectorized implementation of batch gradient descent to 
calculate all the gradients in one go.
Fig 44.c. Vectorized Backward on OR gate data

--- PAGE 32 ---
(Those with a keen eye may be wondering how are the local gradients and 
the final gradients are being calculated in this last step. Don’t worry, I’ll 
explain the derivation of the gradients in this last step, shortly. For now, 
its suffice to say that the gradients defined in this last step are an 
optimization over the naive way of calculating ∂Cost/∂W and ∂Cost/∂b)
Let’s update the weights and bias, keeping learning rate same as the 
non-vectorized implementation from before i.e. α=1.
Now that we have updated the weights and bias lets do a forward 
propagation and calculate the new Cost to check if we’ve done the 
right thing.
Fig 45. Calculated new Weights and Bias

--- PAGE 33 ---
So, we reduced our Cost(Average Loss across all examples) from an 
initial Cost of around 0.089 to 0.084. We will need to do multiple 
training iterations before we can converge to a low Cost.
Fig 46. Vectorized Forward Propagation with updated weights and bias
Fig 47. New Cost after updated parameters

--- PAGE 34 ---
At this point, I would recommend that you perform back propagation 
step yourself. The result of that should be (rounded to 3 decimal 
places): ∂Cost/∂W = [-0.044, -0.035] and ∂Cost/∂b = [-0.031].
Recall, before we trained the neural network, how we predicted the 
neural network can separate the two classes in Figure 9, well after 
about 5000 Epochs(full batch training iterations) Cost steadily 
decreases to about 0.0005 and we get the following decision 
boundary :
The Cost curve is basically the value of Cost plotted after a certain 
number of iterations(epochs). Notice that the Cost curve flattens after 
about 3000 epochs this means that the weights and bias of the neural 
network have converged, so further training will only slightly improve 
our weights and bias. Why? Recall the u-shaped Loss curve, as we 
descend closer and closer the minimum point(flat region) the 
gradients become smaller and smaller thus the steps gradient descent 
takes are very small.
The Decision Boundary shows at the line along which the decision of 
the neural network changes from one output to the other. We can 
better visualize this by coloring the area below and above the decision 
boundary.
Fig 48. Cost curve and Decision boundary after 5000 epochs

--- PAGE 35 ---
This makes it much clearer. The red shaded area is the area below the 
decision boundary and everything below the decision boundary has an 
output( ŷ ) of 0. Similarly, everything above the decision boundary, 
shaded green, has an output of 1. In conclusion, our simple neural 
network has learned a decision boundary by looking at the training 
data and figuring out how to separate its two output classes(y=1 and 
y=0)⓬
⓭
⓮
⓯
⓰. Now the output neuron fires up༻
༼
༽
༾(produces 1) whenever x₁
or x₂ or both are 1.
Now would be a good time to see how the “1/m” (“m” is the total 
number of examples in the training dataset) in the Cost function 
manifested in the final calculation of the gradients.
From this, the most important point to know is that the gradient 
that is used to update our weights, using the Cost function, is the 
average of all the gradients calculated during a training iteration;
same applies to bias. You may want to confirm this yourself by 
checking the vectorized calculations yourself.
Taking the average of all the gradients has some benefits. Firstly, it 
gives us a less noisy estimate of the gradient. Second, the resultant 
learning curve is smooth helping us easily determine if the neural 
network is learning or not. Both of these features come in very handy 
Fig 49. Decision boundary visualized after 5000 epochs
Fig 50. Comparing the effect of derivative w.r.t Cost and Loss on parameters of the neural network

--- PAGE 36 ---
when training neural networks on much trickier datasets, such as those 
with wrongly labeled examples.
. . .
This is great and all but how did you 
calculate the gradients ∂Cost/∂W and 
∂Cost/∂b ?ઋ
ઌ
ઍ
઎.
Neural network guides and blog posts I learned from often omitted 
complex details or gave very vague explanations for them. Not in this 
blog we’ll go over everything leaving no stone unturned.
First, we’ll tackle ∂Cost/∂b. Why did we sum the 
gradients?
To explain this I employ our computational graph technique on three 
very simple equations.
I am particularly interested in the b node, so let’s do backpropagation 
on this.
Fig 51. Computational graph of simple equations
Fig 52. Computational graph of simple equations

--- PAGE 37 ---
Note that the b node is receiving gradients from two other nodes. So 
the total of the gradients flowing into node b is the sum of the two 
gradients flowing in.
From this example, we can generalize the following rule: Sum all the 
incoming gradients to a node, from all the possible paths.
Let’s visualize how this rule is used in the calculation of the bias. Our 
neural network can be seen as doing independent calculations for each of 
our examples but using shared parameters for weights and bias, during 
a training iteration. Below bias(b) is visualized as a shared parameter 
for all individual calculations our neural network performs.
Following the general rule defined above, we will sum all the incoming 
gradients from all the possible paths to the bias node, b.
Fig 53. Sum of gradients flowing into node b
Fig 54. Visualizing bias parameter being shared across a training epoch.

--- PAGE 38 ---
Since the ∂Z/∂b (local gradient at the Z node) is equal to 1, the total 
gradient at b is the sum of gradients from each example with respect to 
the Cost.
Now that we’ve got derivative of the bias figured out let’s move on to 
derivative of weights, and more importantly the local gradient with 
respect to weights.
How is the local gradient(∂Z/∂W) equal to transpose 
of the input training data(X_train)?
This can be answered in a similar way to the above calculation for bias, 
but the main complication here is the calculating the derivative of the 
Fig 55. Visualizing all possible backpropagation paths to shared bias parameter
Fig 56. Proof that ∂Cost/∂b is the sum of upstream gradients

--- PAGE 39 ---
dot product between the weight matrix(W) and the data matrix(Xₜᵣₐᵢₙ), 
which forms our local gradient.
This derivative of the dot product is a bit complicated as we are no 
longer working with scalar quantities, instead, both W and X are 
matrices and the result of W⋅ X is also a matrix. Let’s dive a bit deeper 
using a simple example first and then generalizing from it.
Let’s calculate the derivative of the A with respect to W.
Fig 57.a. Figuring out the derivative of the dot product.
Fig 57.b. Figuring out the derivative of the dot product.

--- PAGE 40 ---
Let us visualize this in case of a training iteration where multiple 
examples are being processed at the same time. (Note that input 
examples are column vectors.)
Just as the bias(b) was being shared across each calculation in a 
training iteration, weights(W) are also being shared. We can also 
visualize the gradient flowing back to the weights, as follows(note that 
the local derivative of each example w.r.t to W results in a row vector of 
the input example i.e. transpose of input):
Fig 57.c. Figuring out the derivative of the dot product.
Fig 58. Visualizing weights being shared across a training epoch

--- PAGE 41 ---
Again, following the general rule defined above, we will sum all the 
incoming gradients from all the possible paths to the weights node, W.
Up till now what we’ve done to calculate, ∂Cost/∂W, though is correct 
and serves as a good explanation however, it is not an optimized 
calculation. We can vectorize this calculation, too. Let’s do that next
Fig 59. Visualizing all possible backpropagation paths to shared weights parameter
Fig 60. Derivation of ∂Cost/∂W after visualization.

--- PAGE 42 ---
Is there an easier way of figuring this out, without 
the math?
Yes! Use dimension analysis.
In our OR gate example we know that the gradient flowing into node Z 
is a (1 × 4) matrix, Xₜᵣₐᵢₙ is a (2 × 4) matrix and the derivative of Cost 
with respect to the W needs to be of the same size as W, which is (1 ×
2). So, the only way to generate a (1 × 2) matrix would be to take the 
dot product of between Z and transpose of Xₜᵣₐᵢₙ.
Fig 61. Proof that ∂Cost/∂W is the dot product between the Upstream gradient and the transpose of Xₜᵣₐᵢₙ

--- PAGE 43 ---
Similarly, knowing that bias, b, is a simple (1 × 1) matrix and the 
gradient flowing into node Z is (1 × 4), using dimension analysis we 
can be sure that the gradient of Cost w.r.t b, also needs to be a (1 × 1) 
matrix. The only way we can achieve this, given the local gradient
(∂Z/∂b) is just equal to 1, is by summing up the upstream gradient.
On a final note when deriving derivative expressions work on small 
examples and then generalize from there. For example here, while 
calculating the derivative of the dot product w.r.t to W, we used a single 
column vector as a test case and generalized from there, if we would have 
used the entire data matrix then the derivative would have resulted in a 
(4 × 1 × 2) tensor (multidimensional matrix), calculation on which can 
get a bit hairy.
. . .
Before concluding this section lets go over a slightly more complicated 
example.
Figure 62, above, represents an XOR gate data. Looking at it note that 
the label, y, is equal to 1 only when one of the values x₁ or x₂ is equal 
to 1, not both. This makes it a particularly challenging dataset as the 
Fig 62. XOR gate data

--- PAGE 44 ---
data is not linearly separable, i.e. there is no single straight line 
decision boundary that can successfully separate the two classes(y=1
and y=0) in the data. XOR used to be the bane of earlier forms of 
artificial neural networks.
Recall that our current neural network was successful only because it 
could figure out the straight line decision boundary that could 
successfully separate the two classes of the OR gate dataset. A straight 
line won’t cut it here. So, how do we get a neural network to figure this 
one out?
Well, we can do two things:
Amend the data itself, so that in addition to features x₁ and x₂ a 
third feature provides some additional information to help the 
neural network decide on a good decision boundary. This process 
is called feature engineering.
Change the architecture of the neural network, making it deeper.
Let’s go over both and see which one is better.
Feature Engineering
Let’s look at a dataset similar looking to the XOR data that will help us 
in making an important realization.
1.
2.
Fig 63. Some linear decision boundaries that are wrong

--- PAGE 45 ---
The data in Figure 64 is exactly like the XOR data except each data 
point is spread out in different quadrants. Notice that in the 1ˢᵗ and 3ʳᵈ
quadrant all the values are positive and in the 2ⁿᵈ and 4ᵗʰ all the 
values are negative.
Why is that? In the 1ˢᵗ and 3ʳᵈ quadrants the signs of values are being 
squared, while in the 2ⁿᵈ and 4ᵗʰ quadrants the values are a simple 
product between a negative and positive number resulting in a 
negative number.
Fig 64. XOR-like data in different quadrants
Fig 65. Positive and negative quadrants

--- PAGE 46 ---
So this gives us a pattern to work with using the product of two 
features. We can even see a similar pattern in the XOR data, where 
each quadrant can be identified in a similar way.
Therefore, a good third feature, x₃, would be the product of features 
x₁ and x₂(i.e. x₁*x₂).
Product of features is called a feature cross and results in a new 
synthetic feature. Feature crosses can be either the feature itself(eg. x₁², 
x₁³,…), a product of two or more features(eg. x₁*x₂, x₁*x₂*x₃, …) or 
even a combination of both(eg. x₁²*x₂). For example, in a housing 
dataset where the input features are the width and length of houses in 
yards and label is the location of the house on the map, a better predictor 
for this location could be the feature cross between width and length of 
houses, giving us a new feature of “size of house in square yards”.
Let’s add the new synthetic feature to our training data, Xₜᵣₐᵢₙ.
Fig 66. Result of the product of features
Fig 67. Quadrant-pattern in XOR data plot

--- PAGE 47 ---
Using this feature cross we can now successfully learn a decision 
boundary without changing the architecture of the neural network 
significantly. We only need to add an input node for x₃ and a 
corresponding weight(randomly set to 0.2) to the input layer.
Given below is the first training iteration of the neural network, you 
may go through the computations yourself and confirm them as they 
make for a good exercise. Since we are already familiar with this 
Fig 68. New training data
Fig 69. Neural Network with feature cross(x₃) as input
Fig 70. Expanded neural network with feature cross(x₃) as input

--- PAGE 48 ---
neural network architecture, I will not go through all the computations 
in a step-by-step by step manner, as before.
(All calculations below are rounded to 3 decimal places)
Fig 71. Forward Propagation in the first training iteration
Fig 72. Backpropagation in the first training iteration

--- PAGE 49 ---
After 5000 epochs, the learning curve, and the decision boundary look 
as follows:
As before, to visualize better we can shade the regions where the 
decision of the neural network changes from one to the other.
Fig 73. Gradient descent update for new weights and bias, in the first training iteration
Fig 74. Learning Curve and Decision Boundary of the neural net with a feature cross

--- PAGE 50 ---
Note that feature engineering allowed us to create a decision 
boundary that is nonlinear. How did it do that? We just need to take 
a look at what function the Z node is computing.
Thus, feature cross helped us to create complex non-linear decision 
boundary.
This is a very powerful idea!
Changing Neural Network Architecture
This is the more interesting approach as it allows us to bypass the 
feature engineering ourselves and lets the neural network figure out 
the feature crosses itself!
Let’s take a look at the following neural network:
Fig 75. Shaded Decision Boundary for better visualization
Fig 76. Node Z is computing a polynomial after adding a feature cross

--- PAGE 51 ---
So we’ve added a bunch of new nodes in the middle of our neural 
network architecture from the OR gate example, keeping the input 
layer and the output layer the same. This column of new nodes in the 
middle is called a hidden layer. Why hidden layer? Because after 
defining it we don’t have any direct control over how the neurons in the 
hidden layers learn, unlike the input and output layer which we can 
change by changing the data; also since the hidden layers neither 
constitute as the output or the input of the neural network they are in 
essence hidden from the user.
We can have an arbitrary number of hidden layers with an 
arbitrary number of neurons in each layer. This structure needs to be 
defined by the creator of the neural network. Thus, the number of 
hidden layers and the number of neurons in each of the layers are 
also hyper-parameters. The more hidden layers we add the deeper 
our neural network architecture becomes and the more neurons we 
add in the hidden layers the wider the network architecture 
becomes. The depth of a neural net model is where the term “Deep 
learning” comes from.
The architecture in Figure 77 with one hidden layer of three sigmoid 
neurons, was selected after some experimentation.
Since this is a new architecture I’ll go over the computations step-by-
step.
First, let’s expand out the neural network.
Fig 77. Neural network with one hidden layer.

--- PAGE 52 ---
Now let’s perform a forward propagation:
Fig 78. Expanded neural network with one hidden layer

--- PAGE 53 ---
Fig 79.a. Forward propagation on the neural net with a hidden layer

--- PAGE 54 ---
We can now calculate the Cost:
After the calculation of Cost, we can now do our backpropagation and 
improve the weights and biases.
Fig 79.b. Forward propagation on the neural net with a hidden layer
Fig 80. Cost of the neural net with one hidden layer after first forward propagation

--- PAGE 55 ---
Fig 81.a. Backpropagation on the neural net with a hidden layer

--- PAGE 56 ---
Fig 81.b. Backpropagation on the neural net with a hidden layer

--- PAGE 57 ---
Fig 81.c. Backpropagation on the neural net with a hidden layer

--- PAGE 58 ---
Fig 81.d. Backpropagation on the neural net with a hidden layer

--- PAGE 59 ---
Whew ⟚
⟛
⟜
⟝
⟞
⟟! That was a lot, but it did a great deal to improve our 
understanding. Let’s perform the gradient descent update:
Fig 81.e. Backpropagation on the neural net with a hidden layer

--- PAGE 60 ---
At this point, I would encourage all readers to perform one training 
iteration themselves. The resultant gradients should be approximately
(rounded to 3 decimal places):
Fig 82. Gradient descent update for the neural net with a hidden layer

--- PAGE 61 ---
After 5000 epochs the Cost steadily decreases to about 0.0009 and we 
get the following Learning Curve and Decision Boundary:
Let’s also visualize where the decision of the neural network changes 
from 0(red) to 1(green):
Fig 83. Derivatives computed during 2ⁿᵈ training iteration
Fig 84. Learning Curve and Decision boundary of the neural net with one hidden layer

--- PAGE 62 ---
This shows that the neural network has in fact learned where to fire-up
(output 1) and where to lay dormant(output 0).
If we add another hidden layer with maybe 2 or 3 sigmoid neurons we 
can get an even more complex decision boundary that may fit our data 
even more tightly, but let’s leave that for the coding section.
Before we conclude this section I want to answer our two remaining 
questions:
1- So, which one is better Feature Engineering or a 
Deep Neural Network?
Well, the answer depends on many factors. Generally, if we have a lot 
of training data we can just use a deep neural net to achieve acceptable 
accuracy, but if data is limited we may need to perform some feature 
engineering to extract more performance out of our neural network. 
As you saw in the feature engineering example above, to make good 
feature crosses one needs to have intimate knowledge of the dataset 
they are working with.
Feature engineering along with a deep neural network is a powerful 
combination.
2- How to count the number of layers in a 
Neural Network?
By convention, we don’t count layers without tunable wights and bias. 
Therefore, though the input layer is a separate “layer” we don’t count it 
when specifying the depth of a neural network.
So, our last example was a “2 layer neural network” (one hidden + 
output layer) and all the examples before it just a “1 layer neural 
network” (output layer, only).
Fig 85. Shaded decision boundary of the neural net with one hidden layer

--- PAGE 63 ---
3- Why use Activation Functions?
Activation functions are nonlinear functions and add nonlinearity 
to the neurons. The feature crosses are a result of stacking the 
activation functions in hidden layers. The combination of a bunch of 
activation functions thus results in a complex non-linear decision 
boundary. In this blog, we used the sigmoid/logistic activation 
function, but there are many other types of activation functions(ReLU 
being a popular choice for hidden layers) each providing a certain 
benefit. The choice of the activation function is also a hyper-
parameter when creating neural networks.
Without activations functions to add nonlinearity, no matter how 
many linear functions we stack up the result of them will still be 
linear. Consider the following:
You may use any nonlinear function as an activation function. Some 
researchers have used even cos, sin, and tan functions.
4- Why Random Initialization of Weights?
This question is much easier to answer now. Note that if we had set all 
the weights in a layer to the same value than the gradient that passes 
through each node would be the same. In short, all the nodes in the 
layer would learn the same feature about the data. Setting the weights 
to random values helps in breaking the symmetry of weights so that 
Fig 86. Showing that stacking linear layers/functions results in a linear layer/function

--- PAGE 64 ---
each node in a layer has the opportunity to learn a unique aspect of the 
training data
There are many ways to set weights randomly in neural networks. For 
small neural networks, it is ok to set the weights to small random 
values. For larger networks, we tend to use “Xavier” or “He” 
initialization methods(will be in the coding section). Both these 
methods still set weights to random values but control their variance. 
For now, its suffice to say use these methods when the network does not 
seem to converge and the Cost becomes static or reduces very slowly when 
using the “plain” method of setting weights to small random values.
Weight initialization is an active research area and will be a topic for a 
future “Nothing but Numpy” blog.
Biases can be randomly initialized, too. But in practice, it does not 
seem to have much of an effect on the performance of a neural 
network. Perhaps this is because the number of bias terms in a neural 
network is much fewer than the weights.
The type of neural network we created here is called a “fully-
connected feedforward network” or simply a “feedforward network”.
This concludes Part Ⅰ.
. . .
Part Ⅱ: Coding a Modular 
Neural Network
The implementation in this part follows OOP principals.
Let's first see the Linear Layer class. The constructor takes as 
arguments: the shape of the data coming in( input_shape ), the 
number of neurons the layer outputs( n_out ) and what type of 
random weight initialization need to be performed
( ini_type=”plain” , default is “plain” which is just small random 
gaussian numbers).
The initialize_parameters is a helper function used to define 
weights and bias. We’ll look at it separately, later.
Linear Layer implements the following functions:
forward(A_prev)  : This function allows the linear layer to take in 
activations from the previous layer(the input data can be seen as 
activations from the input layer) and performs the linear 
operation on them.
backward(upstream_grad) : This function computes the derivative 
of Cost w.r.t weights, bias, and activations from the previous layer
( dW , db & dA_prev , respectively)
•
•

--- PAGE 65 ---
update_params(learning_rate=0.1)  : This function performs the 
gradient descent update on weights and bias using the derivatives 
computed in the backward function. The default learning rate(α) 
is 0.1
Now let's see the Sigmoid Layer class, its constructor takes in as an 
argument the shape of data coming in( input_shape ) from a Linear 
Layer preceding it.
Sigmoid Layer implements the following functions:
forward(Z)  : This function allows the sigmoid layer to take in the 
linear computations( Z ) from the previous layer and perform the 
sigmoid activation on them.
backward(upstream_grad) : This function computes the derivative 
of Cost w.r.t Z( dZ ).
The initialize_parameters function is used only in the Linear Layer 
to set weights and biases. Using the size of input( n_in ) and output
( n_out ) it defines the shape the weight matrix and bias vector need to 
be in. This helper function then returns both the weight(W) and bias
(b) in a python dictionary to the respective Linear Layer.
•
•
•
Fig 87. Linear Layer Class
Fig 88. Sigmoid Activation Layer class

--- PAGE 66 ---
Finally, the Cost function compute_cost(Y, Y_hat) takes as argument 
the activations from the last layer( Y_hat ) and the true labels( Y ) and 
computes and returns the Squared Error Cost( cost ) and its 
derivative( dY_hat ).
At this point, you should open the 2_layer_toy_network_XOR Jupyter 
notebook from this repository in a separate window and go over this blog 
and the notebook side-by-side.
Now we are ready to create our neural network. Let’s use the 
architecture defined in Figure 77 for XOR data.
Now we can start the main training loop:
Fig 89. Helper function to set weights and bias
Fig 90. Function to compute Squared Error Cost and derivative
Fig 91. Defining the layers and training parameters

--- PAGE 67 ---
Running the loop in the notebook we see that the Cost decreases to 
about 0.0009 after 4900 epochs
...
Cost at epoch#4600: 0.001018305488651183
Cost at epoch#4700: 0.000983783942124411
Cost at epoch#4800: 0.0009514180100050973
Cost at epoch#4900: 0.0009210166430616655
The Learning curve and Decision Boundaries look as follows:
The predictions our trained neural network produces are accurate.
The predicted outputs:
 [[ 0.  1.  1.  0.]]
The accuracy of the model is: 100.0%
Make sure to check out the other notebooks in the repository. We’ll be 
building upon the things we learned in this blog in future Nothing but 
NumPy blogs, therefore, it would behoove you to create the layer 
classes from memory as an exercise and try recreating the OR gate 
example from Part Ⅰ.
This concludes the blog⓬ᆷ
⓭
⓮
⓯
⓰ᆸ
ᆹ
ᆺ
ᆻ
ᆼ. I hope you enjoyed.
Fig 92. The training loop
Fig 93. The Learning Curve, Decision Boundary, and Shaded Decision Boundary.

--- PAGE 68 ---
For any questions feel free to reach out to me on twitter @RafayAK
. . .
This blog would not have been possible without 
following resources and people:
Andrej Karpathy’s(@karpathy) Stanford course
Christopher Olah’s(@ch402) blogs
Andrew Trask’s(@iamtrask) blogs
Andrew Ng(@AndrewYNg) and his Coursera courses on deep 
learning and machine learning
Terence Parr(@the_antlr_guy) and Jeremy Howard
(@jeremyphoward)(https://explained.ai/matrix-
calculus/index.html)
Ian Goodfellow(@goodfellow_ian) and his amazing book
Finally, Hassan-uz-Zaman(@OKidAmnesiac) and Hassan Tauqeer 
for invaluable feedback.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

--- PAGE 69 ---

